Term: The Art of Seduction
Definition: The technique through which Eva Duarte, an illegitimate child with harsh past, seduced a nation and Perón, her eventual husband and the country's President by creating a dramatic poetic presence combined with a touch of elusive distance. Over time, people saw in her whatever they wished to, creating ideal images of her.

Term: Familiarity in Seduction 
Definition: The point at which targets have idealized the seducer and begin to understand them more. This could be harmful as overexposure or too much consistency can make the seducer appear too human, and inhibit the target's ability to idealize them. 

Term: Poetic Presence in Seduction 
Definition: Creating a fantastical and bewitching persona that sparks delightful possibilities in the mind of the seduced. By embodying certain ideals or aspects (like chivalry, adventure or romance), the seducer can fill the people's minds with fantasies and dreams. 

Term: Importance of Idealization in Seduction 
Definition: The process of attributing perfect or near-perfect qualities to the seducer, which can enhance the sense of desire in the seduced. 

Term: Target in Seduction
Definition: The person or population being seduced, often towards a particular perception, cause, or individual.

Term: Alfred De Musset's Definition of Ideal Woman
Definition: According to the writer Alfred De Musset, an ideal woman should be something notable, either extremely beautiful, kind, wicked, witty or even stupid, but certainly not common or familiar.

Term: Keys to Seduction 
Definition: For a successful seduction, it's important to tap into people's need to idealize themselves and present a desirable image. By aligning with these versions of themselves, a seducer can make the seduced feel valued, loved, and appreciated. 

Term: Crystallization 
Definition: A mental process of attributing every perfection to the loved one. All events are interpreted as new proofs of the perfection of the loved one. This is the idealization of the person who is loved.