Term: Re-creation of primal pattern in Seduction 
Definition: This involves showering your targets with affection to make them accustomed to it. When you strategically pull back your affection, they'll be driven to imitate your affectionate and giving nature in order to win you back.

Term: The Terrorism of Rejection 
Definition: The fear of rejection is what turns the tables in a relationship making one go from being pursued to the pursuer.

Term: Symbol: The Pomegranate 
Definition: The ripening pomegranate represents a relationship that should not be rushed. Only when the relationship is mature and ready to naturally fall into place should you respond. 

Term: Reversal in Seduction 
Definition: This is a strategy where you intentionally create space and absence to stir interest. However, if done at a critical moment, this can cause a loss of interest. It is only effective later in seduction and shouldn't be prolonged.

Term: Mix Pleasure with Pain Strategy 
Definition: It's recommended to avoid showing too much interest in other people, being too cold or communicating too rarely, as it might lead to the victim becoming dependent or giving up completely. 

Term: Passive Victims
Definition: These are individuals who are waiting for you to make the bold move. Neglecting to make this move might make you appear weak, therefore it is essential to make a defining move with passive victims and then move on. 

Term: The Pleasure of Being Pursued
Definition: As a seducer, or one who instigates the relationship or interest, there is a profound pleasure in experiencing the reversal in roles when your target becomes the pursuer. 

Term: Strategy of Imitation in Seduction
Definition: In seduction, there is a strategy that involves inciting affection in the target and withdrawing strategically to cause the target to imitate your behaviors and actions to win you back. 

Term: Seducer's teachable moments
Definition: As a seducer, you utilize strategic periods of withdrawal to induce anxieties in the target, this subsequently forces the target to imitate the seducer's affectionate nature in order to win them back.