Term: Mirroring
Definition: The behaviour in which one person subconsciously imitates the gesture, speech pattern, or attitude of another.

Term: Self-possession in adversity
Definition: The ability to maintain control over oneself during difficult times.

Term: Chateaubriand, François René, Vicomte de
Definition: A French writer, politician, diplomat and historian who had a significant influence on French literature of the nineteenth century.

Term: Cleopatra
Definition: The last active ruler of the Ptolemaic Kingdom of Egypt, renowned for her beauty and her ability to use it to influence Roman politicians.

Term: Dandies 
Definition: Men placing particular importance upon physical appearance, refined language, and leisurely hobbies, pursued with the appearance of nonchalance in a cult of Self.

Term: Coquettes
Definition: A woman who flirts or lures men to gain attention.

Term: Femme Fatale
Definition: A woman who attracts men by an aura of charm and mystery, often leading them into compromising, dangerous, and deadly situations.

Term: Sirens
Definition: Mythological creatures with enchanting music and voices, who lured sailors to their doom.

Term: Rakes
Definition: A man, especially one who is rich and fashionable, who lives an immoral life.

Term: Courtly Love
Definition: A medieval European literary conception of love that emphasized nobility and chivalry.

Term: Seduction
Definition: The process of deliberately enticing a person, to lead them astray, as from duty, rectitude, or the like; to corrupt, to persuade them to engage in sexual behaviour. 

Term: Drama Saints
Definition: Charismatic people who adopt a dramatic, passionate, and intense approach to life, work, and relationships.

Term: Temptation
Definition: An urge or desire to perform an unwise or immoral act, often leading to a fall from grace.

Term: Sensual Appeals
Definition: Making use of or appealing to the senses or physical pleasure. 

Term: Politicians as Mirrors
Definition: Politicians reflecting the desires and aspirations of the public, strategically using people's emotions and needs for political gain