Term: Effect a Regression 
Definition: This refers to the act of making someone return mentally to past stages in their life, particularly their childhood, by creating atmospheres that reinforce their earliest experiences of unconditional love. 

Term: The Oedipal Regression 
Definition: The second form of regression, following bonding between mother and child. This regression refers to the triangular relationship between mother, father, and child. This involves playing a parental role and evoking the child's early feelings of both love and resentment.

Term: The Ego Ideal Regression
Definition: A type of regression where one rekindles past dreams and ambitions of the target. It takes the target back to their adolescence, when they often imagined themselves as certain figures or with certain qualities.

Term: The Reverse Parental Regression
Definition: In this form of regression, here the seducer regresses and takes on the role of a child, causing the target to take on a parental role. This helps to evoke repressed erotic sentiments in the target.

Term: Unconditional Love
Definition: A rare and treasured form of love, often experienced in early years of life when a primary caregiver, such as a mother, provides extensive care. 

Term: Oedipal Triangle
Definition: A term referring to the triangular relationship between mother, father, and child, formed during the period of a child's early erotic fantasies.

Term: Ego-ideal
Definition: This term is used to refer to an aspirational self-image formed during childhood around how we wish to be, usually embodying bravery, romance or other admired traits.

Term: Repression
Definition: The act of pushing unpleasant or traumatic memories, desires, or experiences, into the unconscious mind. 

Term: Ideal Figure
Definition: A person embodying one's perceivably perfect qualities that is often aspired to be. Formed out of our dreams and ambitions, often during adolescence. 

Term: Infatuation
Definition: An intense, often short-lived passion or admiration for someone. 

Term: Vulnerability
Definition: The state of being open to harm, damage, or emotional upset.