Term: Addicted By Pleasure 
Definition: Listen to your targets' complaints, divert them from their problems by giving them pleasure often enough, and they'll fall under your spell. Being lighthearted and entertaining usually has more charm than being serious and critical.

Term: Energetic Presence 
Definition: An energetic presence is more desirable than lethargy as it implies interest and effort rather than boredom - an enormous societal taboo. 

Term: Illusion and Myth in Politics 
Definition: Engage the public with grand moral issues and illusions rather than asking for sacrifice for the greater good. An appeal that makes people feel good will translate into votes and power.

Term: Harmony Through Charm 
Definition: The charmer knows how to smooth out conflict. Instead of stirring up antagonisms, charm can be used to retreat and concede minor victories. Yielding will disarm potential enemies.

Term: Comfortable Victims
Definition: To make your victims relaxed, mirror their behaviours, adapt to their moods. Seem to share their values and tastes, to resonate with their spirit.

Term: Calm and Adversity 
Definition: Adversity and setbacks provide perfect opportunities for charm. A calm, unflappable exterior puts people at ease and makes them feel that you are patient, waiting for better times or confident of changing the Fates themselves.

Term: Useful Charm 
Definition: Subtly enhance the lives of others by leveraging your social skills to build a network of allies. Follow-through on promises, because true helpfulness and action are perhaps the charm's ultimate form. 

Term: Charmer Example: Benjamin Disraeli 
Definition: Disraeli, the conservative party leader, despite his exotic features and flamboyant style, used charm to win Queen Victoria's favor and influence the monarchy. He did this by promising a better political environment and following through on his promise, showing Queen Victoria that he understood her values and could improve her situation.

Term: The Impact of Women in Society 
Definition: Always engage with women, as they can provide useful critique and feedback. When trying to become fluent in social conversations, women are the best school, according to Benjamin Disraeli.

Term: Charm And Speech 
Definition: A charming person can carry a speech that simultaneously stirs the audience on an emotional level with their tone of voice, visual engagement, and chosen language, often called a charmer in a magical sense.