Term: Charm
Definition: The act of captivating a person's attention and lowering their critical faculties by appealing to their ego, vanity, and self-esteem subtly and leading them on a journey where they become the center of attention, and their strengths, weaknesses, and needs are all catered to.

Term: Sexuality and charm
Definition: In the concept of charm, sexuality plays a pivotal role. It creates a potent and alluring tension, but for charm to persist, it needs to remain subtle or in the background, contributing to charm's allure without taking center stage.

Term: The Charmer
Definition: A person skilled in the art of captivating attention subtly, without making the effort apparent. A Charmer is adaptable, empathetic, and light-handed in their approach, often placing their target in the spotlight while they fade into the background.

Term: Laws of Charm
Definition: Can be summarized as making your target the center of attention, observing and listening to them, individualizing your attention to them based on their shortcomings and strengths, empathizing with their issues, and thereby validating their self-worth.

Term: Carmen
Definition: Latin term for "charm", it is also related to a song or an incantation tied to the casting of a magical spell. Charmers implicitly understand this analogy, giving people something that holds their attention and keeping their attractions subliminal.

Term: Charm in leadership
Definition: Charm is not just for individual interactions but can be applied to a group or public. A leader can charm the public using similar strategies of making them feel valued, heard, and catered to. 

Term: Charm technique: Agreement
Definition: It involves playing along with the target’s opinions, endorsing what they endorse, censuring what they censure, mimicking their emotions and behaviour to make them feel understood and comfortable.

Term: Charm technique: Adaptability
Definition: It involves molding oneself according to the target's spirit, accommodating their whims, wishes, and opinions and making them feel bigger and better thereby validating their worth.

Term: Charm technique: Empathy
Definition: The charm technique where the Charmer shows understanding and sensitivity towards the target's woes, making them feel recognized and valued.