Term: Create a Need—Stir Anxiety and Discontent
Definition: This involves instilling tension and disharmony in one’s target, stirring feelings of discontent and unhappiness with their circumstances. It is about creating feelings of inadequacy that give you space to insinuate yourself, and make the target see you as the answer to their problems. Pain and anxiety are the proper precursors to pleasure.

Term: Master the Art of Insinuation
Definition: This involves making your targets feel dissatisfied and in need of your attention subtly. It's about planting ideas in people's minds by dropping elusive hints. This may involve creating a sublanguage that enters the target's unconscious to convey your real meaning, making everything suggestive.

Term: Enter Their Spirit
Definition: To persuade a person who is locked in their own world, you need to enter their spirit. Adapt yourself to their moods, play by their rules, and enjoy what they enjoy. This approach will stroke their deep-rooted narcissism and lower their defenses, providing you with better chances of persuasion.

Term: Create Temptation
Definition: To achieve this, create a suitable temptation - a glimpse of the pleasures to come. The goal is to awaken a desire in your targets that they cannot control by hinting that you can lead them towards fulfilling their yet unrealized fantasies. The catch is to keep it vague other than specific.

Term: Use the Demonic Power of Words to Sow Confusion
Definition: This involves saying what people want to hear, inflate people's emotions with loaded phrases, flatter them, comfort their insecurities, and envelop them in sweet words and promises. This way, they not only listen to you but indeed lose their will to resist you.

Term: Pay Attention to Detail
Definition: In seduction, subtle gestures and the offhand things you do are more charming and revealing than grand gestures. Learn to distract your victims with pleasant little rituals and thougtful gifts tailored just for them. This helps in keeping their attention and interest without revealing your real intention.

Term: Poeticize Your Presence
Definition: This refers to becoming more familiar by alternating an exciting presence with a cool distance. Associating yourself with poetic images and objects will help the targets to idealize you.

Term: Disarm Through Strategic Weakness and Vulnerability
Definition: By displaying weakness or vulnerability, you can make your actions look more natural and less calculated. This helps in making the other person feel superior and stronger while covering your tracks.