Term: Seducers
Definition: Individuals who see every human encounter as a potential moment of seduction. They have a warrior's outlook in life and view people as kind of walled castles to which they lay siege. They penetrate the mind as the first line of defense by making the target fantasize about them. Seducers also possess an outward-directed gaze rather than being self-absorbed. They view life as theater and are completely amoral, regarding everything as a game and an arena for play.

Term: Seduction 
Definition: A game of psychology that is within the grip of anyone willing to look at the world through the eyes of a seducer. It involves penetrating the target's mind as the initial point of defense, strategizing to target their particular weaknesses and not leaving any part of the process to chance. Seducers manage to tone down the sexual element without entirely getting rid of it, which makes them pleasant to be around.

Term: Momentum in Seduction 
Definition: With each successful seduction, seducers gain experience and become more confident, which in turn makes them more alluring. This continuous momentum draws people to the seducer in greater numbers.

Term: Pleasure Providers 
Definition: Persona assumed by seducers who see themselves as providers of pleasure and adventure. The seducer knows that people can never get enough pleasure from friends and lovers or by themselves, and uses this knowledge to provide pleasure and adventure, making it hard for people to resist them.

Term: Amorality in Seduction 
Definition: Seducers are utterly amoral in their approach to life. They do not concern themselves with others' opinions and do not indulge in moral judgments. They consider everything as a game, steering clear of anything that could be the least seductive.

Term: Seduction and Romance Prejudice 
Definition: The main barrier to becoming a seducer is the misconception of love and romance as some kind of sacred, magical realm where things naturally fall into place. What actually seduces a person is the amount of effort expended on their behalf, which reveals how much they are worth. 

Term: Life Theater 
Definition: A seducer views all of life as a theater and everyone as an actor. They are capable of assuming any role, relishing in their ability to perform without being restrained by their identity. Their flexibility and spirit are what make them attractive.