A visual demonstration that face-to-face communication is more difﬁcult than texting.
In the photo on the top of page 21, note the signals of disinterest between
the two individuals who are trying to carry on a conversation. e man has his
hands in his pockets and is looking away. e woman is looking down. ere
are no head tilts, no smiles, no positive gestures, no mirroring of each other.
e photo on the bottom shows the ease and positive body language associated
with young people in the midst of texting.
e Like Switch is designed to bring out the best in you when it comes to
making friends and enjoying successful relationships—in real life, not just in
digitally enhanced life.
2
GETTING NOTICED BEFORE A WORD IS
SPOKEN
You never get a second chance to make a good ﬁrst impression.
—WILL ROGERS
Perhaps you were fortunate enough as a child to spend a lazy summer evening
watching nature’s light show. Maybe you even grabbed a Mason jar from the
kitchen and tried to capture the pinpoints of luminescence that appeared and
disappeared in the gathering darkness, moving like tiny lanterns adrift on a
gentle breeze.
Fireﬂies are one of earth’s most fascinating creatures. For our purposes, how
ﬁreﬂies light up isn’t really that relevant; you’d need to be half biologist and
half physicist to understand the process. What is interesting is why they light
up.
It turns out ﬁreﬂies light up for a number of reasons. Some scientists believe
their ﬂashing is a warning to potential predators that they taste bitter and
would make a lousy meal. How the predators would leap to that conclusion
(leap is a good word, since frogs seem to devour them in serious numbers) is
not explained. Others point to the fact that diﬀerent species of ﬁreﬂies have
diﬀerent ﬂash patterns that help them identify members of their own species
and also determine the sex of the ﬂasher. e reason that is of interest here
involves the ﬁreﬂy’s use of light as a mating signal. Here “ﬂashing” takes on a
whole new meaning. It has been determined that male ﬁreﬂies have speciﬁc
ﬂash patterns that are used to attract their female counterparts. In case you
need a conversation starter, it might interest you that Marc Brown observed
