zone of the continuum. You are a stranger to those around you, as they are
strangers to you.
Most human interactions remain in the stranger zone. We hardly take
notice of the hundreds, even thousands, of personal contacts we experience in
our daily lives as we go about our business. Yet, sometimes a stranger does
something that makes us take notice of his or her presence; we become aware
of this individual. It doesn’t have to be something obvious. In fact, at ﬁrst we
might not even understand why a particular person has “caught our attention.”
So, what makes a stranger suddenly stand out and become a person of
interest? ey have been picked up by, for lack of a better name, your brain’s
territory scan. Scientists have discovered that as we go about our daily lives, our
senses are constantly sending messages to our brain, which, in turn, processes
the information to assess, among other things, if any given individual in our
range of observation can be ignored, is worthy of approach, or is someone to
avoid. is process is automatic or “hardwired” into our brains and is based on
the brain’s capacity to interpret speciﬁc nonverbal and verbal behaviors as
either “friend,” “neutral,” or “foe” signals.
e function of the “territory scan” can be described using the following
analogy. A woman is walking up and down a stretch of oceanfront beach. As
she moves, she holds a metal detector in front of her, sweeping it left to right,
side to side. Most of her walk is uninterrupted; the metal detector has not
“picked up” anything of interest lying beneath the sand. But, every so often,
the machine will beep and the woman will stop and dig in the sand to discover
what is buried there. What she ﬁnds might be treasure . . . an expensive watch
or a valuable coin. Or it could be trash . . . a discarded can or tin foil. If she is
extremely unlucky, it could be some long-forgotten land mine just waiting to
be detonated.
Your brain is like the metal detector, constantly evaluating your
environment for signals that indicate things you should approach or avoid, or
that are irrelevant and can be ignored. Behavioral scientists have spent decades
discovering, cataloging, and describing the kinds of human behaviors the brain
interprets as “friend” or “foe” signals. Once you know what the signals are, you
will be able to use them to make friends and, as a collateral beneﬁt, keep
people away from you that you would like to avoid.
FOR RENT, FOR LEASE, OR NOT FOR SALE SIGNS
One of my students reported to the class that she started picking up interesting
nonverbal signals at her local bar. She frequently observed that men in
exclusively committed relationships sent out diﬀerent signals than those men
in committed relationships who were seemingly seeking extra-relationship
aﬀairs. e student commented that she could sense strong nonverbal foe
signals from some of the married men that discouraged unwanted personal
attention. But other supposedly committed men were sending out strong
friend signals that they were seeking something extra. e student noted that
these friend signals were more subtle than the friend signals transmitted by
unattached men.
THE URBAN SCOWL
Have you ever wondered why one individual seems to have the “knack” when
it comes to attracting others, making a good impression, and getting people to
like him or her, while another person, who is equally attractive and successful
in life, can’t seem to duplicate that “magnetic appeal”? It often comes down to
unconsciously sending oﬀ “foe” signals. Another student presented me with
(unfortunately for her) a great example of this. She mentioned that she was
having trouble making friends at the Midwestern college where I teach. She
said that people often remarked that she appeared cold, aloof, and
unapproachable, but that once they got to know her, she had little diﬃculty
developing close relationships with them.
As we talked, I found out she grew up in a tough and dangerous
neighborhood in Atlanta, where she had to learn from a young age to have a
very thick skin. I told her that she didn’t need to improve her communication
skills, but instead, all she had to do was change the way she presented herself to
people. She hadn’t stopped showing her “urban scowl” to the world. is is not
uncommon for people who grow up in rough neighborhoods or even just large
cities . e urban scowl sends a clear, nonverbal signal to others that you are a
foe, not a friend. It is a warning to stay away and “don’t screw with me.”
Predators are less likely to target people who project this urban scowl, so it
becomes a valuable survival tool in tough neighborhoods. Once she makes a
