determine if any recruitment attempts by foreign intelligence services took
place. I speciﬁcally asked the scientist to describe the proximity, frequency,
duration, and intensity with any people they met during their trips. I also
briefed the scientists before they went to China to be aware of the subtle
techniques the Chinese use to steal our secrets.
THE FRIENDSHIP FORMULA AND YOU
roughout the rest of this book, the Friendship Formula will be used as the
foundation upon which friendships are built. Regardless of what type of
friendship you desire (short, long, relaxed, or intense) it will always be
inﬂuenced by proximity, frequency, duration, and intensity. ink of the
Friendship Formula as the concrete foundation upon which a house is built.
e home can take many diﬀerent forms, just like friendships can, but the
foundation remains basically the same.
APPLYING THE FRIENDSHIP FORMULA IN EVERYDAY LIFE
I met Phillip, the son of a close friend, at a local coﬀee shop. Phillip had
recently graduated from a small-town college and landed his ﬁrst job in Los
Angeles. He was single and wanted to make new friends. He had lived his
entire life in small towns but suddenly found himself in a big city, where
making friends seemed like a daunting task.
I advised him to routinely frequent a bar near his apartment and display
friend signals as he entered to send the message he was not a threat (friend
signals are introduced in the next chapter), and to sit alone at the bar, a table,
or a booth.
His daily visits to the bar would allow proximity to take hold, and his
constant appearances would allow for frequency and duration to be
established. With each visit, he could gradually increase intensity, the ﬁnal
component of the Friendship Formula, by looking at other customers a little
longer and smiling. Phillip needed a curiosity hook to draw people to him.
Phillip told me he was an antique marble collector. I instructed him to bring a
magnifying glass and a bag of marbles with him each time he visited the bar. I
further instructed him to set the marbles on the bar and thoughtfully examine
each one with the magnifying glass. is activity would serve as a curiosity
hook. I also told him to build good rapport with the bartender and servers
because they would become his ambassadors to the members in the
community. Because the bartender and servers had direct contact with Phillip,
other customers would naturally ask them who the new person was. When
they did, they would say nice things about Phillip, which in turn would form a
primacy ﬁlter through which the other customers would view Phillip. (Primacy
ﬁlters will be discussed in the next chapter.)
Several weeks later, Phillip telephoned me and reported that I was right.
e ﬁrst time he visited the bar he ordered a drink, laid out the marbles, and
examined them one by one with the magnifying glass. A few minutes after the
bartender served Phillip his drink, he asked him about his unusual activity .
Phillip told the bartender brieﬂy about his marble collection and noted the
diﬀerences in size, color, and texture of each marble. After several visits to the
bar, Phillip and the bartender became better acquainted.
e bartender liked Phillip and introduced him to several people who were
obviously interested in his quirky hobby. e marbles served as a conversation
starter and made the transition to other topics eﬀortless.
e Friendship Formula looks like magic, but it is not. It just mirrors the
way people normally form relationships. And knowing the basic elements of
friendship development makes building friendships easy.
HOW VLADIMIR WAS INFLUENCED BY THE FRIENDSHIP FORMULA
Remember that Vladimir had initially vowed to not speak to me. e ﬁrst
thing I did was to establish proximity. Every day I sat with him and read the
newspaper, not saying a word, virtually ignoring him. is silent activity
established proximity, but, more important, did not pose a threat. Once
Vladimir determined that I was not a threat, he became curious. Why does this
agent come each day? What is his purpose? Why doesn’t he say anything to
me? My daily visits and silent reading activity served as a curiosity hook.
Overcome with curiosity, Vladimir eventually broke his silence and made the
ﬁrst move to establish contact. Speaking with me was no longer my idea; it
