relative or friend that had the most money to spend and you were depending
on them for that new bike or wad of cash, and instead wound up with a suit or
a set of encyclopedias.
Don’t make this kind of mistake with your partner. Even if you are well-
intentioned and spend a lot of thought and eﬀort getting your special person
that special gift, it will not be appreciated if it is not something he or she
wanted in the ﬁrst place. One would think that after ten, twenty, or thirty
years or more, partners would have a good idea of what each other wants.
Amazingly, this is not always the case. e husband who buys his wife a
vacuum cleaner for Valentine’s Day is not just the stuﬀ of advertisements and
urban legends; it actually does happen.
What’s the best way to make sure that what you get someone is what he or
she wants? Ask! Or, even better, listen to what they say and you will probably
be able to detect what it is they want. Be observant. An open catalogue on the
kitchen table with an item circled in red ink might provide a clue.
One of the problems with asking a person what they want is you give them
what they desire, but it isn’t a “surprise.” One way around this, particularly
when it comes to giving gifts for holidays, is to have your partner put
suggested pictures of items they would enjoy receiving in a special box. For
instance, it could be an ad for a vacation, or a desired household item or
possibly a menu from a special restaurant. at way, the partner can choose
one of the items from the box and purchase it, and the person receiving the
gift won’t know which one to expect. e element of surprise, although not
total, does add more excitement to gift exchanges.
EMPATHY
Empathy is the ﬁnal component of CARE and a critical component of any
successful long-term relationship. Being able to sense how your partner feels,
and caring about it, is essential to maintaining a good relationship. People who
have been together for a long time have a natural advantage when it comes to
empathizing with their partner. ey have had years to learn even the most
subtle nuances of that individual’s moods, unique needs, and behavioral
idiosyncrasies.
It is amazing what a kind word will do when you sense your partner is
feeling down. Using empathic statements such as “You must really be hurting”
when learning your loved one has suﬀered a setback sends a powerful message
that you were caring enough to pick up on the problem and willing to take the
time to express your concern. “Being there” for a partner who is physically or
psychologically hurting provides great comfort, and such compassion is
remembered and cherished.
Empathy is such an important part of relationships it has been recognized
and extolled for decades as a critical tool in shaping relationships of all kinds:
short term, long term, personal, and business. No less a luminary than Henry
Ford summed it up nicely when he observed: “If there is any one secret of
success it lies in the ability to get the other person’s point of view and see
things from that person’s angle as well as from your own.”
Concern/compassion, Active listening, Reinforcement, and Empathy are the
components of CARE that turn short-term friendships into long-term
relationships, and long-term relationships into all they are capable of
becoming.
HOW TO DEAL WITH ANGRY PEOPLE (INCLUDING YOURSELF):
PRACTICING ANGER MANAGEMENT
e tools you have been provided to carve out satisfying short and long-term
relationships are designed to work with almost anyone (no, psychopaths are
not included!). is doesn’t mean that any given relationship will be totally
satisfying and devoid of conﬂict. Even the best of friends and signiﬁcant others
can have disagreements, even angry disagreements, when in bad moods or on
opposite sides of an issue. Learning to deal with anger, which is inevitable in
any relationship, is an important skill you’ll want to develop for getting over
the rough spots in any interpersonal interaction.
HOW TO SUCCESSFULLY HANDLE ANGER IN PERSON-TO-PERSON
INTERACTION
