the following mathematical formula:
Friendship =Proximity + Frequency + Duration + Intensity
Proximity is the distance between you and another individual and your
exposure to that individual over time. In the Seagull case, Charles didn’t
simply walk up to Seagull and introduce himself. Such behavior would have
resulted in Seagull’s rapid departure from the scene. e conditions of the case
required a more measured approach, one that allowed Seagull time to “get
used” to Charles and not view him as a threat. To achieve this end, the
friendship factor of proximity was employed. Proximity serves as an essential
element in all personal relationships. Just being in the same vicinity as your
recruitment target is critica l to the development of a personal relationship.
Proximity predisposes your recruitment target to like you and promotes
mutual attraction. People who share physical space are more likely to become
attracted to one another, even when no words are exchanged.
e key to the power of proximity is that it must take place in a
nonthreatening environment. If a person feels threatened by someone being
too close, they go “shields up” and take evasive action to move away from that
person. In the Seagull scenario, Charles was proximal to his target, but he kept
a safe distance to prevent him from perceiving Charles as a potential danger
and consequently triggering a “ﬁght or ﬂight” response.
Frequency is the number of contacts you have with another individual
over time and Duration is the length of time you spend with another
individual over time. As time passed, Charles employed the second and third
friendship factors: Frequency and Duration. He did this by positioning
himself on Seagull’s shopping route in a manner that increased the number of
instances (frequency) where the foreign diplomat saw him. After several
months, he added duration to the mix by spending longer periods of time
around Seagull. He did this by following his target into the grocery store,
thereby extending the contact tim e between them.
Intensity is how strongly you are able to satisfy another person’s
psychological and/or physical needs through the use of verbal and
nonverbal behaviors. e ﬁnal factor in the Friendship Formula, Intensity,
was achieved gradually over time as Seagull became more and more aware of
Charles’s presence and the FBI agent’s seemingly unexplainable reluctance to
approach him. is introduced one type of intensity, curiosity, into the mix.
When a new stimulus is introduced into a person’s environment (in this case a
stranger enters Seagull’s world), the brain is hardwired to determine if that new
stimulus pre sents a threat or a perceived threat. If the new stimulus is judged
to be a threat, the person will attempt to eliminate or neutralize it by
employing the ﬁght or ﬂight response. If, on the other hand, the new stimulus
is not perceived as a threat, then it becomes the object of curiosity. e person
wants to learn more about the new stimulus: What is it? Why is it there? Can I
use it to my beneﬁt?
Charles’s activitie s were conducted at a safe distance and, over time, became
the object of Seagull’s curiosity. is curiosity motivated Seagull to discover
who Charles was and what he wanted.
Seagull later told Charles that he knew he was an FBI agent the ﬁrst time he
saw him. Whether this was true or not, Seagull received the nonverbal “friend”
signals the FBI agent was sending him.
Once Seagull determined that Charles was an FBI agent, his curiosity
increased. He certainly knew he was a target of recruitment, but for what
purpose and at what price? Since Seagull was already unhappy with his career
advancement and looming retirement, he no doubt thought about diﬀerent
scenarios involving Charles, including working as a spy for the FBI.
e decision to become a spy is not made overnight. Potential spies need
time to develop their own rationalization strategies and time to grow
accustomed to switching their allegiance. e recruitment strategy for Seagull
included a length of time for the seed of betrayal to germinate. Seagull’s
imagination provided the necessary nutrients for the idea to mature and
bloom. is latency period also provided time for Seagull to convince his wife
to join him. As Charles moved physically closer to Seagull, the diplomat did
not see the FBI agent as a pending threat but rather as a symbol of hope—
hope for a better life in the years to come.
Once Seagull made up his mind to assist the FBI, he had to wait for
Charles to approach him. Seagull later told Charles that the wait was
excruciating. His curiosity peaked. “Why wasn’t the American operative
