infrequent intervals, during your life, such as salespeople, clerks, service
personnel, and the like.
You can be almost certain, for example, that if you eat out at a restaurant
during prime dinner hours, your server will be rushed. Simply saying, “Boy,
you look busy!” will usually bring an aﬃrmative response and, along with it,
superior service. e individual you spoke with appreciates that you noticed
them and recognized the work challenge they face. It makes them feel better
about themselves and, based on the Golden Rule of Friendship, they are going
to like you for what you did. If you want to be even more empathic, add a
compliment to your original statement that allows them to ﬂatter themselves.
“Boy, you’re really busy! I don’t know how you do it.” Or: “Boy, you’re busy!
ere’s no way I could keep up with all those orders.”
ere are times that you don’t need to witness a person of interest’s
discomfort or complaints to make eﬀective empathic comments. is happens
when you can infer that a person might be experiencing diﬃculties and would
appreciate recognition of their plight. To illustrate: If it is late in the day and
you see a woman clerk in high heels working the ﬂoor in a department store,
you might comment, “Wow, your feet must get tired with you having to stand
up at work all day.” Chances are you’re going to be right and the salesperson
will respond positively to your empathetic behavior.
Parents can eﬀectively use empathic statements when they want to
encourage their children to talk to them, especially when they are teenagers.
Most teenagers are reluctant to openly share information and experiences with
their parents, for a wide variety of reasons. Demanding, threatening, or
cajoling a response typically ends in a shields-up reaction, causing the teen to
become more resolute in their determination not to talk with you.
To avoid this nonproductive response, use an empathic statement such as
“You look like you are thinking about something pretty serious,” “You look as
though something is really bothering you,” or “You’re worried about
something.” Your teen might respond in several ways. First, they could agree
with you and disclose what is on his or her mind. Second, they could provide a
partial response. In this event, construct another empathic statement to tease
out a few more details. Most teens want to tell their parents what’s bothering
them. ey just need a little encouragement and the belief that talking to you
is their choice. e third response is a curt reply and silence. In this instance,
the applicable empathic statement could be something to the eﬀect of
“Something’s bothering you and you don’t want to talk about it right now.
When you feel the time is right, let me know and we can talk.”
Showing empathy toward another person, whether it is done through
empathic statements or other forms of verbal commentary, is a powerful way
to make another person feel better about themselves and make them your
friend at the same time. In your friendship toolbox, the empathy tool will be
one of your most often used and eﬀective techniques for shaping successful
relationships. What you say and how you listen will go a long way in
establishing or destroying friendships.
AVOIDING CONVERSATION PITFALLS
Getting people to like you, as we have seen, can be facilitated by encouraging
them to talk about themselves while you listen to what they say and using that
information to choose and use your various friendship tools to cement the
relationship. For this reason, the last thing you want to do is discourage (usually
unintentionally) the two-way ﬂow of communication between yourself and the
person who you hope will perceive you as a friend. To keep the
communication ﬂowing smoothly, be sure to steer clear of common
conversation pitfalls that impede verbal exchanges between individuals.
1. Avoid talking about topics that engender negative feelings in your listener. Negative feelings
make people feel bad about themselves and, consequently, they will like you less.
2. Don’t constantly complain about your problems, your family’s problems, or the problems of
the world. People have enough problems of their own without hearing about yours . . . or
anyone else’s for that matter.
3. Avoid talking excessively about yourself. Talking about yourself too much bores other people.
Keep the focus on the other person in your conversation.
4. Do not engage in meaningless chatter; it turns people (and the Like Switch) oﬀ.
5. Avoid expressing too little or too much emotion. Extreme displays of emotion may put you in
a bad light.
PUTTING IT ALL TOGETHER
