roller coaster, or pursue other activities that create the perception of danger.
e shared experience will bring you closer together and reinvigorate your
friendship or romance.
THE LAW OF CURIOSITY
Curiosity can be used as a “hook” to increase intensity (Friendship Formula)
and pique a person’s interest in you. It is an eﬀective way to make friends. All
creatures capable of more than a mere mechanical response to stimuli are
curious. It is a biological imperative, driven by the need for self-preservation,
reproduction, and greed. Humans want to know everything: who we are, who
others are, where we came from and when, what’s on the other side of the hill,
and the shape, size, composition, longevity, and distance of everything from
quarks to the universe.
In order to survive, animals above the primitive level must understand the
niche in which they live. In addition, they must discover any changes in that
niche to be able to respond to them appropriately and eﬀectively. Since it is
personal survival that the individual is concerned about, the changes in the
immediate vicinity—those that will aﬀect him or her personally—are the most
important.
e most eﬀective way to discover changes is to go looking for them. us,
a noise in the bushes draws the cat’s attention, followed by a slow, stealthy stalk
(no sense charging into trouble). e noise might be prey, it might be a
predator, or it could be the automatic sprinkler coming on. is curiosity can
lead to a meal, a timely escape, or an inadvertent bath. In any case, it must be
investigated.
When you behave in a manner that produces curiosity in another person, it
signiﬁcantly increases the chances that individual will want to interact with
you in an attempt to satisfy their curiosity. us, a “curiosity hook” becomes
an eﬀective tool to meet a person of interest and develop a friendship. I used
the Law of Curiosity regularly as an FBI agent to enhance my recruiting
eﬀectiveness of foreign nationals. At one point during my FBI career, a North
Korean moved into my jurisdiction. ere was reason to suspect he was an
agent for his government and I was given the assignment to try to get the guy
to become a double agent. I knew if I simply walked into the photo shop
where he worked and said, “I’m Jack Schafer with the FBI, can we talk?” the
guy would have probably panicked and bolted from the store. So I decided to
use a curiosity hook to try to reel him in.
First, I went into his store when I knew he wasn’t there and left him a note
saying, “Sorry I missed you,” and signed it, “Jack Schafer.” I did this on three
separate occasions. On the third visit, I added my phone number to the note I
left behind. All these messages were designed to pique the North Korean’s
curiosity. Who is this Jack Schafer and why does he want to contact me? is
was what I wanted the North Korean to be wondering, hoping that each new
note would further arouse his curiosity. It worked. After receiving the note
with my phone number, he called me and I was able to arrange a meeting with
him later in the week.
THE LAW OF RECIPROCITY
Social norms dictate that if someone gives you something or performs a favor
for you, large or small, then you are predisposed to return the gesture in like
kind or in greater measure. Organizations take advantage of this law by
mailing people return address labels, calendars, or other small trinkets along
with a request for a donation. People are more likely to comply because they
received something ﬁrst and feel obligated to reciprocate in kind.
e Law of Reciprocity is a very eﬀective tool for making friends. When
you smile at someone, that person feels obligated to return the smile. A smile
signals acceptance and liking. People like to be liked. e principle of
reciprocity is triggered when people become aware that someone else likes
them. Once a person discovers that another person likes them, they ﬁnd that
person more attractive. People tend to reciprocate the same feelings others
extend to them. Reciprocity produces the most dramatic results when both
parties to the inter action form good ﬁrst impressions of or have natural feelings
toward the other person.
Not “You’re Welcome,” But . . .
