agreement. Students who are not interested, or who have lost interest, will lean
back in their seats, roll their eyes, or in extreme circumstances, tilt their heads
backward or forward as they doze oﬀ.
is focus on nonverbal cues can also be used in business settings. If you are
making a sales pitch to a group of people, you can learn who you have won
over, who is on the fence, or who is in opposition by monitoring the nonverbal
gestures displayed by your audience.
THE TABLES ARE TURNED . . . OR TURN THOSE WHO ARE AT THE TABLE
Back in my days at the FBI, I had to do many presentations. In one particular
presentation I was trying to obtain the necessary funds for an operation that I
had been planning for months. e operation was complex and somewhat
expensive. Getting funding came down to convincing the people at the
meeting that the beneﬁt from the operation was worth the amount of resources
expended.
As I made my presentation, I monitored the nonverbal displays of the
people who were sitting around the table. I immediately identiﬁed the ones
who were on my side. ey were leaning forward and occasionally nodding
their heads. I also identiﬁed those who were skeptical about the merits of the
operation or the expenditure of resources. My immediate inclination was to
talk to the people who agreed with me (preaching to the choir) because I
would ﬁnd acceptance and comfort from those people who thought the same
way I did. I resisted this temptation. I didn’t have to convince the people who I
had already won over. I had to win over those people who did not agree with
me.
I focused my attention on them. On several occasions, I walked around the
room moving closer to my detractors, looked directly at them, and made
personal appeals. Ever so slowly, I could see that the tide was turning. ose
individuals originally aligned against me began leaning forward by increments
and their heads tilted more and more to either side.
After my presentation, I received approval for my operation. Monitoring
nonverbal cues and knowing what they meant gave me an enormous advantage
in presenting my case. I was able to tailor my presentation to the people who
disagreed with me and win them over.
WHISPERING
Whispering is an intimate behavior and positive friend signal. Not every one
can whisper in your ear with impunity. When you see whispering taking place
between two individuals, you can be relatively certain a close personal
relationship exists.
FOOD FORKING
Imagine sitting in a restaurant and some stranger comes over to your table and
picks food oﬀ your plate with a fork! You would certainly feel uneasy, and be
most unlikely to ask the individual to join you for dinner. Now imagine you
are having a pleasant meal with your family and a son or sister reaches over and
picks a piece of food oﬀ your plate with a fork. e probability is your reaction
would be radically diﬀerent from when the stranger did the same thing. e
diﬀerence is that you have a close relationship with your family members and,
under these conditions, food forking is considered appropriate. Food forking,
then, is a friend signal and, if permitted, indicates a close relationship between
the person possessing the food and the person reaching for it.
EXPRESSIVE GESTURES
e amount and intensity of gestures people use vary from one culture to
another and even within cultures. Some people are naturally more expressive
than others, even in more socially restrained cultures. Nonetheless, people who
like one another tend to display more expressive gestures. Expressive gestures
signal interest in what the other person is saying and keeps the focus of the
conversation on the speaker.
Speakers can emphasize a point with a sharp downward movement of the
hand at the end of a sentence, or express openness and sincerity with extended
