6
BUILDING CLOSENESS
e loftiest ediﬁces need the deepest foundations.
—GEORGE SANTAYANA
Making friends requires a particular bonding agent to hold the relationship
together: rapport. When you “connect” with another person you have rapport.
It is the ground from which the relationships grows. As noted writer and
speaker Kevin Hogan observed, “Building rapport begins with you.” If you
want to make friends, it is your responsibility to establish rapport and then, if
you want to continue beyond a brief encounter, to strengthen that rapport to
expand the relationship into a cohesive, long-lasting bond.
is chapter has all the tools you need to establish and build rapport, but
ﬁrst let’s return for a moment to the friend-foe continuum.
FRIEND–STRANGER–FOE
e friend-foe continuum makes no distinction in the levels of friendship that
are possible between not knowing anyone at all (stranger) and the friend end of
the continuum. Obviously, such diﬀerences exist and these diﬀerences in turn
dictate how rapport should be developed in our personal encounters. ese
diﬀerent levels of friendship are depicted in the following:
STRANGER–CASUAL ENCOUNTER–ACQUAINTANCE–FRIEND–SIGNIFICANT
OTHER
Looking at this “friendship continuum,” you can see that the level of contacts
increases in signiﬁcance, moving from a brief, infrequent interaction to a
potentially lifelong relationship. Building rapport becomes more important as
we evolve along the continuum from the “casual encounter” to the “signiﬁcant
other.” is is because the interaction becomes more intense and meaningful as
people who were once strangers become an increasingly integral part of each
other’s lives.
is chapter is designed to help you understand how and whether you are
eﬀectively building closeness with persons of interest.
BUILDING RAPPORT
People are communal beings. We naturally seek to connect to other people.
Rapport builds a psychological bridge between people and paves the way for
various levels of friendship to develop. If I can build rapport with you I can be
relatively certain you will like me. It’s that simple.
When I interviewed witnesses and suspects, my ﬁrst task was to build a
psychological connection between myself and the person I was interviewing.
People, especially suspects, rarely open up to people they don’t like. In the case
with suspects, I am asking that person to reveal secrets that would put him or
her in prison for a long time. On one occasion, I interviewed a repeat sexual
assault suspect. We connected on the topic of sports. Once the rapport bridge
was established, I was able to delve deeper into his personal life. Eventually, the
suspect confessed his crimes. e suspect voluntarily maintained his
connection with me long after his trial, conviction, and sentencing through a
series of unanswered letters he sent me. In the letters he thanked me for being
his friend and treating him with respect. Treating the suspect with respect is
possible; being his friend was an illusion; nonetheless, his letters provide a
testament of the power of connecting with other people.
TESTING FOR RAPPORT
Testing for rapport is important in any personal interaction because it lets us
know “how we are doing” and “where we stand” in developing a relationship
with any given individual. Even in a onetime encounter with someone,
particularly if we want something from them, testing for rapport is important
