behavior—your head tilts and eyebrow ﬂashes become awkward—and your
intentions are revealed, leaving you as the victim of your own self-fulﬁlling
prophecy . . . and a failed attempt to make a friend. If you want to avoid the
spotlight eﬀect, you ﬁrst have to know of its existence.
Now you do.
THE NONVERBAL TWO-STEP
During my FBI career, I attended many conferences and parties. On one
occasion, I attended a pre-conference “get-to-know-you party” with a fellow
member of the Behavioral Analysis Program. e party became boring, so my
friend and I amused ourselves by playing “nonverbal footrace.”
e game worked like this: We each selected partygoers who were at an
equal distance from the door. e object of the game was to see who could get
their selected target to cross the threshold of the door without them realizing
what they were doing. We initially engaged each of our targets in casual
conversation at an acceptable physical distance. Knowing that people
unconsciously try to maintain a comfortable distance from the person they are
talking to, we took imperceptible steps closer to our targets. As the space
between us and our targets closed, they unconsciously stepped backward to
maintain their personal space. We repeated this maneuver until our targets
passed the doorjamb. e ﬁrst person to accomplish this was declared the
winner. In one instance, I backed my target into the lobby of the hotel without
his conscious awareness. When he realized where he was, he exclaimed,
“Whoosh! How did we get out here?” I just smiled and shrugged my shoulders.
e ﬁrst step in successfully imitating friend (or foe) signals is to watch how
other people naturally display these signals and, also, to monitor your own
signals. When you imitate a friend signal, try to duplicate the same sensation
you feel when you catch yourself automatically displaying these nonverbal
communications.
A good place to hone these skills is walking down the street, in shopping
malls, and in other public places. When a person approaches, tilt your head,
make eye contact, and smile. Watch the person’s reaction. If the individual
returns an eyebrow ﬂash along with a smile, you have successfully transmitted
a friend signal. If the person gives you a goofy look or a “get away from me,
you creep” expression, you might have chosen a sourpuss or need more
practice. Over time, you should see an improvement in how people respond to
your friend signals. Further, with practice, you won’t have to consciously think
about sending the signals or how they look; they will become automatic.
Acquiring new skills, or making old skills look authentic when we use them
“in the spotlight,” takes lots of practice. While working to perfect these signals,
you might become discouraged and give up for various reasons, including
embarrassment, lack of immediate mastery of the new skills, or frustration.
is is normal. In studying how people acquire new skills, scientists have
discovered that many novices experience a period of “free fall” early in the
learning experience. During this time, individuals are not comfortable using
the new skills and become frustrated or embarrassed when the skills do not
work as advertised. Instead of continuing to practice the skills, they give up.
Don’t you be one of those people! Persevere through this free-fall phase,
conﬁdent in the knowledge that you will achieve skill mastery with time and
eﬀort. e frustration and discomfort of acquiring new skills will be well worth
the eﬀort because you will be rewarded with superior results in achieving
successful relationships.
at should make smiling very easy to do, consciously or otherwise!
TO ERR IS HUMAN . . . AND MAKES THAT HUMAN MORE LIKABLE, TOO
At the beginning of my lectures, I intentionally make several mistakes that don’t damage my credibility, such as
mispronouncing a word or misspelling a word on the whiteboard. The participants immediately correct my small
errors. With a show of embarrassment, I graciously accept the correction and credit the participants for being
attentive.
This technique accomplishes several objectives. First, the participants making the corrections feel good
about themselves, which builds rapport and friendship. Second, participants are more likely to spontaneously
interact during the lecture without the fear of looking stupid in front of the instructor. After all, they reason, it’s
okay to make mistakes because the instructor already has made several himself. Third, minor mistakes make
me look human. People like lecturers who are subject matter experts yet at the same time possess human
qualities similar to the seminar participants (the Law of Similarity, discussed in Chapter 5).
OBSERVE AND LEARN
