The smile on the top is fake, the expression on the top right is neutral, and the smile on the bottom is real.
SMILES FOR EFFECT
e way you smile will inﬂuence the way people perceive you and encourage
or discourage friendship formation. Women in particular often use smiles to
regulate the initiation of ﬁrst encounters and to set the pace of the subsequent
personal interactions. Men more readily approach women who smile at them.
A sincere smile gives men permission to approach. A forced smile or no smile
at all sends the message that a woman is not interested in a man’s overtures.
Likewise, a woman can send the message that she is open to male approaches
by regulating the frequency and intensity of her smile, in conjunction with
other friend signals.
Learning how to produce a “real” smile at will, particularly when you don’t
feel in the mood to display it, takes practice. Study the pictures in the book
and think about smiles you have seen in your everyday life. en stand in front
of a mirror and actually produce fake and real smiles. It won’t be that diﬃcult.
Just think about the times you have genuinely wanted to show appreciation to
someone you loved or were forced to smile at some unwanted houseguest at a
family dinner or at an obnoxious business associate. Practice the real smile
until it becomes automatic.  en you can choose to use it when you wish.
EYE CONTACT
Eye contact works in concert with other friend signals. Eye contact can be
attempted from a distance and, therefore, like other nonverbal signals in this
chapter, it is a way to get noticed before a word is spoken. Also, like the other
nonverbal signals, it is designed to give the signal receiver a positive impression
of you, as someone who will be perceived as a potential friend.
To send a friend signal via eye contact, pick out your person of interest and
establish eye contact by holding your gaze for no longer than a second.
Holding an eye gaze for longer than that can be perceived as aggression, which
is a foe signal. As mentioned earlier, when you stare at someone, especially in a
dating environment, you are invading his or her personal space. If you do not
have permission to enter that individual’s personal space, your actions will be
perceived as predatory behavior at best, creepy at worst. You should end the
eye gaze with a smile. If you cannot manage a genuine smile, make sure that
the corners of your mouth are upturned and wrinkle the outer edges of your
eyes. A return smile indicates interest. If your person of interest meets your
gaze, looks down and away brieﬂy, and then reestablishes eye contact, you can
approach this person with a high degree of conﬁdence that your overtures will
be well received.
EXTENDED EYE GAZE
Extended eye gaze is a powerful rapport builder. is nonverbal behavior
should not be confused with staring. Typically, when you make contact with
another person, your eyes lock for a second or less and then you break eye
contact. Eye contact lasting more than a second or two will be perceived as
threatening. Staring at people, especially strangers, is considered a foe signal.
However, when two people know and like each other, they are permitted to
make eye contact for longer than a few seconds. People who are romantically
involved often stare into each other’s eyes for extended periods of time. With
the following technique the power of this mutual gaze can be safely used on
strangers to enhance rapport building.
After you make eye contact with your person of interest, hold your gaze for
one second and then slowly turn your head, holding your gaze for another
