THE INWARD LEAN
People tend to lean toward individuals they like and distance themselves from
people they don’t like. Occasionally during my FBI career, I was asked to
attend embassy parties and diplomatic functions. I spent most of my time
observing the other guests to determine which relationships were well
established, which relationships were developing, and which guests were
receptive to relationship building.
An inward lean is receptive to relationship building. Inward leaning between people conversing indicates a positive
relationship has already been established. Inward leaning in association with other friend signals such as smiles,
head nodding, head tilts, whispering, and touching indicates an even closer relationship between the parties
involved.
People tilt their heads slightly backward to increase distance from another
person, which signals that relationship building is not going well. e same
thing applies when individuals turn their torsos away from another person
during interaction. People will also reposition their feet away from unwanted
visitors. ese subtle, nonverbal cues can mean the diﬀerence between
acceptance and rejection.
I often use nonverbal signals to monitor the eﬀectiveness of my lectures.
Students who are interested in the material will lean forward in their seats, tilt
their heads to the right or the left, and periodically nod their heads in
agreement. Students who are not interested, or who have lost interest, will lean
back in their seats, roll their eyes, or in extreme circumstances, tilt their heads
backward or forward as they doze oﬀ.
is focus on nonverbal cues can also be used in business settings. If you are
making a sales pitch to a group of people, you can learn who you have won
over, who is on the fence, or who is in opposition by monitoring the nonverbal
gestures displayed by your audience.
THE TABLES ARE TURNED . . . OR TURN THOSE WHO ARE AT THE TABLE
Back in my days at the FBI, I had to do many presentations. In one particular
presentation I was trying to obtain the necessary funds for an operation that I
had been planning for months. e operation was complex and somewhat
expensive. Getting funding came down to convincing the people at the
meeting that the beneﬁt from the operation was worth the amount of resources
expended.
As I made my presentation, I monitored the nonverbal displays of the
people who were sitting around the table. I immediately identiﬁed the ones
who were on my side. ey were leaning forward and occasionally nodding
their heads. I also identiﬁed those who were skeptical about the merits of the
operation or the expenditure of resources. My immediate inclination was to
talk to the people who agreed with me (preaching to the choir) because I
would ﬁnd acceptance and comfort from those people who thought the same
way I did. I resisted this temptation. I didn’t have to convince the people who I
had already won over. I had to win over those people who did not agree with
me.
I focused my attention on them. On several occasions, I walked around the
room moving closer to my detractors, looked directly at them, and made
personal appeals. Ever so slowly, I could see that the tide was turning. ose
individuals originally aligned against me began leaning forward by increments
and their heads tilted more and more to either side.
After my presentation, I received approval for my operation. Monitoring
nonverbal cues and knowing what they meant gave me an enormous advantage
