information from adversaries while at the same time maintaining good rapport
with them. e characteristics of elicitation:
1. Few, if any questions are asked, thus preventing a defensive reaction from the person of
interest;
2. the process is painless because your person of interest is not aware they are revealing sensitive
personal information;
3. people will like you because you are making them the focus of your undivided attention; and
4. individuals will thank you for being so kind and will likely contact you in the future, which
provides another opportunity to glean additional information from them.
Elicitation works because it is based on human needs.
The Human Need to Correct: Using Elicitation Through Presumptive Statements
People have a need to be right, but people have a stronger need to correct
others. e need to be correct and/or to correct others is almost irresistible.
Making presumptive statements is an elicitation technique that presents a fact
that can be either right or wrong. If the presumptive is correct, people will
aﬃrm the fact and often provide additional information. If the presumptive is
wrong, people will provide the correct answer, usually accompanied by a
detailed explanation as to why it is correct.
Recently I was buying a piece of jewelry, but I was hoping to not pay retail.
In order to negotiate the best price, I had to know the markup on the jewelry
in the store where I was going to make the purchase and also the clerk’s
commission, if any. For obvious reasons, this information is closely held. I
knew if I asked direct questions about prices, I would not get the answers I
needed to negotiate the best deal, so I used elicitation to get the information I
wanted.
CLERK: May I help you?
ME: Yes, I’m looking for a diamond pendant for my wife.
CLERK: We have lots of those. Let me show you what we have.
e clerk handed me a velvet case containing several pendants. I looked
intently at one of them.
ME: How much is this one?
CLERK: One hundred and ninety dollars.
ME: Woooh, the markup must be at least 150 percent. (presumptive statement)
CLERK: No. It’s only 50 percent.
ME: And then your 10 percent commission. (presumptive statement)
CLERK: Not that much. I only get 5 percent.
ME: I suppose you don’t have the authority to discount. (presumptive statement)
CLERK: I am authorized to give a 10 percent discount. Anything after that, the manager has to
approve.
At this point, I could either take the 10 percent discount or press further.
Given the poor economic conditions when I visited this jewelry store, I
suspected the manager would be willing to give me a further discount, if he
still made a proﬁt.
ME: Ask the manager if he will sell this piece at a 40 percent discount. (I waited patiently as the
clerk went into the back room. She returned a few minutes later.)
CLERK: He said the best he can do is 30 percent if you pay cash.
ME: It’s a present for my wife.
Clerk: No problem. I’ll gift wrap it for you. (I not only saved $57, but got gift wrapping, too!)
In this case, using elicitation instead of direct questions yielded valuable
information. I was able to ascertain the markup on the jewelry (50 percent)
and the clerk’s commission (5 percent), which allowed me to negotiate with
conﬁdence. If I did not want to negotiate, I could have taken the automatic 10
percent discount for a savings of $19. Had the clerk not divulged this
information, I would have paid full price. Based on the clerk’s behavior, she did
not realize she had revealed closely held information.
EMPATHIC ELICITATION
e Empathic Statement is versatile because it can be combined with
elicitation techniques. Two empathic elicitation techniques that are based on
the human need to correct will be discussed, the empathic presumptive and the
empathic conditional. Salespeople routinely use empathic elicitation. Customers
are less likely to buy something from someone they don’t like. Salespeople use
empathic elicitation to accomplish two goals. First, empathic statements
quickly build rapport, and second, empathic elicitation gleans information
from customers that they would not normally reveal under direct questioning.
EMPATHIC PRESUMPTIVE
