Of course, the answer you want to hear is “Cheating is wrong. I would
never do that to you.” However, be prepared for answers such as “Everybody
cheats nowadays,” “If a wife can’t take care of her husband’s needs, what else is
a man to do?” “If my wife treated me the same way she treated him, I’d cheat
on her, too,” and “It’s no wonder, they haven’t been getting along lately.”
ese answers tend to reﬂect what a person really thinks about cheating.
e individual in this case tends to think that extramarital aﬀairs are acceptable
under certain conditions, and he or she is therefore predisposed to cheat when
those conditions are met. ese “third-person” responses are not 100 percent
accurate, but they do provide insights into your loved one’s predisposition to
cheat and are much more reﬂective of his or her true feelings than any answer
you might get through direct questions on the issue.
HE’S NOT WORTH THE WEIGHT
A student of mine, Linda, was in a serious relationship with a young man and
contemplating marriage. She struggled with a weight problem and exercised
regularly to keep in shape. However, she knew that she would eventually gain
weight as she aged or if she were to become pregnant. She wanted to know
how her boyfriend would feel if she put on extra pounds. She was concerned
he might have problems with it.
One evening, Linda suggested to her boyfriend that they watch the TV
show e Biggest Loser. e program highlights morbidly obese people who
enter into a program that includes exercise, diet, and lifestyle changes to shed
pounds. e person who loses the most weight by the end of the show wins a
large prize. Halfway through the show, her boyfriend blurted out, “If my wife
ever got like that, I’d kick her to the curb.”
Linda’s concerns appeared justiﬁed. Her boyfriend was commenting from a
third-person perspective, so he revealed his true feelings. She tested him by
asking the direct question, “If I ever became overweight, would you kick me to
the curb?” Predictably, her boyfriend replied, “No, honey, I’d love you no
matter how much you weighed.”
But by using the internal/external foci elicitation technique, she found out
how he really felt. She eventually broke up with him.
If you have children, you can use the internal/external elicitation technique
to probe their feelings about sensitive issues. For instance, let’s say you want to
know if your kids are using drugs. If you asked them the direct question, “Are
you using drugs?” they would frame their answer within social norms and
answer, “No, of course not, drugs are bad.”
e best way to ﬁnd out how your children really feel about drugs is to ask
them from a third-party perspective. For example, “My friend’s son got caught
in school with marijuana. What’s your take on that?” You want to hear
“Marijuana is bad and I would never use it.” However, be prepared for “at’s
stupid. He should have never brought it to school,” “It’s only weed,” or “No
big deal. I know lots of kids who smoke marijuana.” ese responses indicate
that your kid may be using marijuana or is predisposed to experimentation.
Again, these responses are not foolproof evidence of drug use by your child,
but they do provide insights into your child’s predisposition.
RULE #4: EMPATHIZE: USE EMPATHIC STATEMENTS AND OTHER VERBAL
OBSERVATIONS THAT MAKE YOUR LISTENER(S) AWARE THAT YOU KNOW
HOW THEY FEEL.
People develop positive feelings toward those individuals who can “walk in
their shoes” and understand what they are experiencing. Your empathic
statements and/or statements of concern send a message to the listener that
you comprehend their circumstances and realize what they have to say is
meaningful. In doing so, you are fulﬁlling the other person’s need to be
recognized and appreciated. is makes them feel better about themselves and
in turn makes them feel better about you, which encourages friendship
development.
You’ll be amazed at how often you will get the chance to use empathic
statements to start conversations and jump-start getting people to like you. All
it takes is a willingness to observe people for a few moments before you speak
to them. What you will see, more often than you might expect, is the
individual you are watching saying or doing something that reveals they are
dissatisﬁed with the current situation they are in. is is especially true when
you are dealing with individuals whom you might only confront once, or at
