Even a dull conversation can be enhanced using empathic statements. For
example, your coworker is talking excitedly about his weekend trip to the lake.
Unless you went to the lake with your coworker, the experience might not
interest you. An empathic statement such as “Sounds like you really enjoyed
your trip” will let the speaker know that you are listening and taking an
interest in what he or she is saying. Empathic statements are the spice of
conversations. If you make it a habit to use empathic statements, you will force
yourself to listen more carefully to other people. As a consequence they will
feel good about themselves and like you.
Remember, individuals enjoy talking about themselves and feel good when
people listen as they verbalize their thoughts, which brings us back to the
Golden Rule of Friendship. When you can make a person feel good about
themselves, they are going to be more favorably disposed to liking you and
accepting you as a friend.
BUILDING TRUST IN LESS THAN TEN MINUTES
is was the title of an article written by an anesthesiologist named Scott
Finkelstein. In the article, he describes what it’s like to face life-and-death
problems on a daily basis and emphasizes the importance of doctor-patient
communication in dealing with medical crises. “I give each patient my full
attention,” explains Dr. Finkelstein. “I maintain eye contact. I listen. I validate
their feelings, . . . e fear melts away. And then they trust me. All in less than
ten minutes.”
Giving a person the opportunity to talk, listening to what they say without
interruption, and giving nonverbal cues that what they say is of interest to you
can make a huge diﬀerence, whether it be in gaining a patient’s trust or a
person’s friendship.
RULE #2: OBSERVE: IN ANY VERBAL INTERACTION BE SURE TO OBSERVE
THE OTHER PARTY BEFORE, DURING, AND AFTER RECEIVING AND
TRANSMITTING INFORMATION.
Whenever you interact with another person, communication takes place on
two levels: verbal and nonverbal. Before, during, and after verbal interaction it
is important that you observe the other individual’s nonverbal signals and body
language, as they can serve as a barometer to assess if a conversation is
appropriate, how an ongoing conversation is progressing, what impact the
conversation had when ﬁnished, and, also, as a warning should something be
said that a party to the verbal exchange ﬁnds objectionable. Backward leaning,
crossing the arms over the chest, and lip compressions are good nonverbal
indicators that the conversation is not being well received. People tend to
distance themselves from things they don’t want to see or hear. is is the
opposite of the leaning-forward nonverbal cue discussed earlier. Crossing the
arms over the chest is a blocking gesture, which could indicate the person
wants to symbolically and physically block what they are seeing or hearing.
Other signs of disengagement are looking around the room, when the person
looks at their watch as if to say, “Time’s up,” or turning their feet, torso, or
both toward the door or other parts of the room. When you see the other
person beginning to disengage from the conversation, change the subject. You
are probably spending too much time talking about yourself and not focusing
on the other person.
It is important to observe nonverbal behavior even before any attempt at
conversation is made. Of course, the importance of observation doesn’t stop
there. Should a person’s nonverbals signal that beginning a conversation is
appropriate, then let the talking commence. Just don’t take that as the reason
for ending your observation! Continual observation during an ongoing verbal
interaction is critica l for spotting any potential problems that might otherwise
go unnoticed.
is is particularly true when it co mes to “word mines.”
Words mean diﬀerent things to diﬀerent people. When these words are
used they can, like land mines, blow apart a developing relationship. When a
party to the conversation is oﬀended by one of these word mines, he or she
doesn’t normally say anything about their discomfort but simply begins the
process of distancing and/or exiting the relationship. However, their nonverbal
behavior often provides a clear indication that something troubling was said.
ey might wince, get a shocked or surprised look on their face, or take a step
