Closed posture displays are typically the opposite of open posture displays.
ese include tightly crossed arms, a low rate of hand movements, and few
friend signals. If the person you are talking with is looking at you but their
torso and feet are pointing in another direction, he or she is not fully engaged.
A person’s feet will often point in another direction to subconsciously telegraph
a desire to leave. Other signs of disinterest are backward leaning of the body or
head, supporting the head with the hands, or negative grooming behaviors
such as picking at teeth or nails.
TORSO REPOSITIONING
People who share rapport will orient themselves toward each other. Leaning in
or away from someone is one form of torso shift indicating good or poor
rapport. Another type of torso shift is illustrated in the two photographs on
the following page. is type of nonverbal body movement involves shifting
the torso so it faces the person of interest more directly. Such a body shift is a
good indication of increasing rapport between the individuals involved.
In testing for rapport using torso movements, the basic rule to remember is
that people who share rapport will orient their bodies toward each other. is
is the typical sequence for achieving such an orientation: First, the other
person’s head will turn toward you. Second, the other person’s shoulders will
turn toward you. Finally, the other person will reposition his or her torso so
that it directly faces you. When this occurs, you can be conﬁdent that rapport
has been established.
Torso repositioning sequence
BARRIERS
A good way to test for rapport is to look for barriers that individuals place
and/or remove between themselves and other people. People who do not feel
comfortable with other individuals will erect barriers or leave ones already
there in place. On the other hand, individuals who feel at ease with the person
with whom they are interacting will keep an open space between them, even if
it involves removing barriers that are already between them.
