to determine when and if we have reached a point in the relationship where we
can attempt to achieve our relationship objectives. at being said, testing for
rapport reaches its most signiﬁcant level of importance when we are interested
in developing closer, more enduring relationships over time.
Sometimes there is an overlap between the behaviors we use to build
rapport and the behaviors we use to test for rapport. In these cases, the degree
and intensity of the behaviors vary as personal relationships strengthen or
weaken and provide us with an objective measure of a deepening or dying
relationship. For example, eye gaze is a way to build rapport. e length of that
gaze is used to test for rapport, providing a measure of how far the relationship
has developed or deteriorated. What follows are some of the important
behaviors that can be used to test for the foundation of friendships between
individuals.
TOUCHING
Touching represents a reliable gauge to measure the intensity of a relationship.
When strangers meet, they typically touch one another on the arms below the
shoulders or on the hands, as was discussed earlier in the book. Any touching
that occurs outside this public touch zone suggests a more intense relationship.
Women who feel comfortable with the person they are talking to will often
reach out and give the other person a light touch on the forearm or knee if
they are both seated. is light touch indicates that rapport has been
established.
Men often mistake a light touch to the forearm or knee as an invitation to
have sex. is is rarely the case. Men, more so than women, tend to interpret
nonverbal gestures signaling good rapport as a sexual oﬀer. When a woman
gives a man a light touch, the only safe assumption he can make is that she
likes him, and nothing more. is male tendency to assume a woman’s touch is
a sexual invitation often damages budding relationships, often beyond repair.
e most intimate (nonsexual) place a man can touch a woman in public is
the small of her back. is place is reserved for men who have earned the right
to make an intimate public display of aﬀection. Touching the small of a
woman’s back can also serve as a relationship indicator. If, for example, you see
a woman you’d like to meet speaking with another man, you can test the
strength of their relationship by observing the actions of the man as you
approach. If the man extends his arm and hovers over the small of the woman’s
back, he is staking his claim, but he has not yet earned the right to invade the
woman’s personal space. is gesture means that you still have a chance to gain
her aﬀection without interfering with an ongoing, committed relationship.
If a man attempts to prematurely touch the small of a woman’s back, she
will often ﬂinch and show nonverbal signs of discomfort, or a combination
thereof. On the other hand, if, as you approach, the man ﬁrmly touches the
small of the woman’s lower back or hip region, you should assume that the
relationship has progressed well beyond the introductory stage and you should
look elsewhere for companionship.
An intimate touch.
