5
SPEAKING THE LANGUA GE OF FRIENDSHIP
Ultimately the bond of all companionship, whether in marriage or friendship, is
conversation.
—OSCAR WILDE
In Chapter 2, you learned that you can use nonverbal communication to make
friends. In a sense, these “friend signals” act like snowplows, clearing the way
for you to approach your person of interest and make a positive ﬁrst
impression along the way. Used alone, however, these smiles and head tilts are
insuﬃcient to sustain a relationship. For that, verbal communication is
required and, in fact, the words you say, and those said to you, will not only
play a large role in making friends, they will also impact the length and
strength of the friendships you acquire.
If there is only one thing you remember about how to make friends
through verbal communication, let it be this: e more you can encourage the
other person to speak, the more you listen to what they say, display empathy, and
respond positively when reacting to their comments, the greater the likelihood that
person will feel good about themselves (Golden Rule of Friendship) and like you as
a result. is means that when I (“ME”) desire YOU as a friend, I want to let
you know I am interested in what you have to say, and, in addition, give you
plenty of time to say it.
GREAT INVENTION, GOOD INTENTION, WRONGF UL MENTION, SHARP
DISSENSION
Take the following scenario, which could easily play out any day in
organizations around the world. It illustrates the power of verbal
communication in determining relationship eﬀectiveness. It also demonstrates
how the words we use can make the diﬀerence between success and failure in
making friends and achieving our objectives.
Stacey, a recent college graduate, secured a coveted position at a prestigious
chemical company. She completed each assigned task with passion and skill.
She kept up with new developments in the ﬁeld and always sought new and
more cost-eﬀective techniques to shore up the company’s bottom line.
One day, Stacey discovered an innovative method to reduce the cost of
manufacturing a certain chemical. It was a major breakthrough and she went
directly to her manager to report what she had found.
She could hardly contain her excitement when she entered her boss’s oﬃce
and didn’t even sit down before she blurted out the good news: “You’ve been
manufacturing this chemical all wrong. I found a new and cheaper way to do
it!”
Much to her dismay, Stacey’s manager dismissed her ﬁndings with a wave of
his hand and admonished her to concentrate on her assigned work. Crushed,
Stacey returned to her cubicle and vowed never to take the initiative again.
Sadly, Stacey never understood why her idea was rejected. In reality, her
intentions were good, but the manner in which she communicated her idea
was not well thought out or appropriate. Communication is much more than
conveying ideas; it also encompasses how you convey the ideas in real-world
situations. Stacey failed to consider some basic psychological tenets of
successful communication. In Stacey’s statement to her manager she made
several communication errors that led to her manager’s rejection of her idea.
1. “If I’m Right, Then You’re Wrong.” People rarely consider the push-pull qualities of declarations
such as “I’m right” or “My way is better.” If you are right, then the other person is
automatically assumed to be wrong. If your way is better, then the other person’s way is
automatically assumed to be worse. e “I’m right and you’re wrong” paradigm forces people
to assume a defensive posture to protect their egos or reputations, or for myriad other reasons.
A person who is forced into a defensive posture by such statements is less likely to consider
new ideas, let alone adopt them.
2. Us Against Them or I Against You. Stacey used the pronouns you and I. e use of these pronouns
creates an adversarial situation. e you and I paradigm pits one person against the other. In
Stacey’s case, she unintentionally created an adversarial relationship between herself and her
boss. Adversarial settings create winners and losers. Winners conquer; losers are left to lick their
wounds. Adversarial relationships invite competition along with negative feelings, which are
not conducive to eﬀective communication.
