second or two. e person you are looking at will see your head turning away,
giving the illusion of broken eye contact, and your actions will not be
perceived as staring. is technique allows you to intensify the emotional
content of your friend signal. Increased eye contact should not be used to force
premature intimacy. Men often overuse this technique and sabotage potential
relationships.
PUPIL DILATION
Pupil dilation expresses interest. When an individual sees another person they
like, their pupils, the black portion of their eyes, expand. e wider the
dilation, the more the attraction the person feels. is is obviously a cue for
positive attraction, although it is diﬃcult to spot in everyday personal
interactions. us its value as a friend signal is very limited.
Pupil dilation is most noticeable in people with blue eyes. People who have
dark eyes appear more exotic because their eyes appear to be dilated all the
time. In the last century BC, Cleopatra, the most beautiful woman of her time,
used atropine, a naturally occurring drug, to dilate her pupils to make herself
appear more sensual. Pupil dilation can occur with changes in ambient light,
so care should be taken when interpreting this autonomic response.
GETTING CONSENT TO GO TO PRISON: USING FRIEND SIGNALS TO
ENCOURAGE A CONFESSION
In one particular case, while I was at the FBI, we had identiﬁed a suspected
child molester. We knew of one victim, but signs pointed to many more. It was
believed that the suspect used his computer to target victims. I wanted to arrest
him immediately but lacked the necessary probable cause to obtain the arrest
warrant.
I decided to interview the suspect to seek his consent for the FBI to
examine his personal computer. If the interview had any chance of success, I
had to create a nonthreatening environment, quickly build rapport, and, when
the time was right, ask for consent. I invited the suspect to meet me at the FBI
oﬃce. I did this to give him a sense of control (he could determine his course
of action) and to demonstrate that the interview was voluntary (he wasn’t
being forced to participate in the interview).
I met the suspect at the door with a manufactured eyebrow ﬂash, a slightly
tilted head, and a simulated real smile complete with crow’s feet around my
eyes. Displaying real friend signals was not possible because I found the
suspect’s behavior reprehensible. I warmly shook his hand and invited him into
the interview room. I oﬀered him a cup of coﬀee, for two reasons. First, I
wanted to tap into the psychological principle of reciprocity. When people
receive things, even trivial things, they feel a need to reciprocate. In exchange
for coﬀee I wanted consent. Second, I wanted to use the suspect’s placement of
the cup to determine when rapport had been established (cup placement will
be discussed in a later chapter). When I handed the suspect the cup of coﬀee,
he stated, “How could you treat me with such respect after what I did?” is
was an admission, albeit a small one, even before the interview began. I was
able to establish suﬃcient rapport with the suspect using mimicked friend
signals to give the suspect the illusion that I was not a threat, but a person he
could trust with a secret. A secret that put him in jail for the rest of his life.
THE BOTOX PARADOX
When it comes to friend signals, sometimes the best of intentions have
unforeseen negative consequences. Consider, for example, the sad story of the
aging wife who wanted to look younger and more attractive for her spouse. She
decided to get Botox treatments for her face, a bit of sculpting to get the lines
and wrinkles out. She couldn’t wait to show oﬀ the results to her husband.
So, what happened when he saw his “new” wife? Because the Botox
paralyzes certain muscles around the eyes for about two months, she couldn’t
display eyebrow ﬂashes and full, real smiles, including the crow’s feet he was
used to seeing. e woman looked more attractive but because her husband
wasn’t getting the friend signals he was accustomed to, he suspected his wife
didn’t love him anymore and that she had gotten the procedure to look more
appealing for someone else. Unless the husband is aware of why the wife is not
sending the friend signals he has come to expect, the results of trying to be
pretty could turn out quite ugly!
