People automatically think that other people think like they do, especially
when meeting an individual for the ﬁrst time. us when you ﬁrst meet
another individual, you can build on this predisposition by seeking things you
have in common.
When assessing someone from a distance, look for potential commonalities.
ese can be found, for example, in the way people dress. An individual
wearing a shirt embossed with a sports team logo suggests that he or she has at
least a passing interest in the team. Even if you don’t favor the same team, you
can use the information to start a conversation, particularly if you have any
interest in sports.
What a person is doing can also serve as a basis for establishing common
ground. If a person is walking a dog, reading a book, or pushing a baby
carriage it provides you with valuable information for identifying potential
conversation openers and/or similar interests.
Tattoos can also provide clues to people’s interests. Tattoos are permanent.
Most of the time when people get one, they put some thought into the type of
tattoo they want and where it should be placed on their bodies. A small tattoo
of a marijuana leaf placed on a prominent part of a person’s body projects a
strongly held attitude. If you are strongly opposed to the use of weed, it might
be best to look elsewhere for a friend who shares more compatible beliefs.
e way a person interacts with others can also provide clues to their
personal disposition. A person who slumps in a chair and does not easily
interact with others has a diﬀerent disposition than someone who sits upright
and easily engages those around them. If your personality diﬀers signiﬁcantly
from the person across from you, the probability of developing a close
relationship signiﬁcantly diminishes.
After you make initial contact with a person, listening to what they say can
provide you with additional clues to their likes and dislikes. Make a conscious
eﬀort to direct the conversation toward the things you have in common.
Talking about shared experiences, interests, hobbies, jobs, or any number of
other common topics enhances rapport and the development of friendships.
Here are a few illustrations of how quickly you can ﬁnd common ground with
other individuals.
CONTEMPORANEOUS EXPERIENCE
A contemporaneous experience means that you and the person you just met
share the same interests or attitudes. For example, if you spot someone wearing
a shirt with a Chicago White Sox logo and you are a White Sox fan, then you
share a contemporaneous interest in that team. However, just because someone
is wearing a White Sox shirt does not automatically mean he or she is a White
Sox fan. In addition to building rapport, empathic statements can be used to
explore observations or hypotheses you may develop regarding the person you
just met. Consider the following conversation:
BRYAN: Hi, my name is Bryan. What’s yours?
CHRISTINE: Christine.
BRYAN: So you must be a White sox fan. (empathic statement)
CHRISTINE: I’ve been a Sox fan all of my life.
BRYAN: Me too.
By using an empathic statement, Bryan learned that both he and Christine
were passionate about the White Sox. Once common ground has been
established, Bryan can now focus on that topic and the conversation will ﬂow
naturally. If Brian is not a Sox fan, he could retreat to their shared general
interest in baseball, as in this exchange:
BRYAN: Hi, my name is Bryan. What’s yours?
CHRISTINE: Christine.
BRYAN: So you must be a White Sox fan. (empathic statement)
CHRISTINE: I’ve been a Sox fan all my life.
BRYAN: I like baseball, but I’m a Cubs fan.
CHRISTINE: Oh, I don’t follow minor-league baseball.
(Note: It’s obvious that Christine, besides having a sense of humor, has
disdain for her favorite team’s crosstown rival!) Once it has been established
that Christine and Bryan share an interest in baseball but root for diﬀerent
teams, Bryan could use that information to spark a lively conversation on the
pros and cons of each ball club.
People who share the same hometowns can quickly build friendships,
especially when they meet outside those geographical boundaries. Shared job
interests, political positions, religious beliefs, mutual friends, and similar
experiences are good topics to explore for common ground.
