example, religious or political). However, in many cases they are referring to
the individual’s personality, which is incongruent with their own.
Two pervasive personality types, extroversion and introversion, are of
particular interest when it comes to personal interaction and the development
of both short- and long-term relationships.
Extroverts, as compared to introverts, appear more attractive because they
are seen as gregarious and self-conﬁdent. Prior to entering into any type of
relationship, knowing whether the person you want to meet tends toward
extroversion or introversion is useful information as it will give you an idea of
what types of behavior you can expect to encounter.
If you are an extrovert and the person you want to meet is an intro vert,
expect to see some inherent diﬀerences in the way each of you perceives the
world. Extroverts get their energy from being with other people and seek
stimulation from their environments. Extroverts often speak spontaneously
without thinking. ey do not hesitate to use a trial-and-error method to
arrive at a decision. Conversely, introverts expend energy when they engage
socially and seek alone time to recharge their batteries. Introverts seek
stimulation from within and seldom speak without thinking. ey also
carefully weigh options before making decisions.
Extroverts maintain a wide variety of relationships; however, those
relationships tend to be relatively shallow. Introverts, on the other hand, have
few relationships, but they are characterized by greater depth. Introverts who
date extroverts typically seek a closer relationship to which extroverts are less
willing to commit. is inability to reach a mutually satisfying level of
commitment highlights dissimilarity, which ultimately reduces mutual
attraction.
Extroverts use stream of consciousness to communicate. What they think,
they say. is spontaneity often gets extroverts into trouble, particularly with
introverts who think before they speak and are more easily embarrassed by
what they consider to be personal information when it is blurted out by an
extroverted companion. If you are an introvert who is thinking of becoming
involved with an extrovert, be prepared for the unexpected when it comes to
the words that come tumbling out of their mouth.
Generally, introverts and extroverts behave diﬀerently in social situations.
Extroverts tend to be more outgoing when they don’t know many people.
Introverts, on the other hand, tend to feel uncomfortable in large groups of
unfamiliar people. However, when introverts are in the company of friends or
are comfortable with their surroundings, they can become as outgoing as
extroverts (for a while, at least).
One method to determine if a person is an extrovert is to begin a sentence
and deliberately pause for a few seconds. Extroverts will generally complete the
sentence for you. Introverts will not. e same method can be used to
determine if you have established rapport with an introvert. When introverts
are comfortable with the people they are with, they will often complete
sentences in the same manner in which extroverts do. e diﬀerence in the use
of this method is that you can identify extroverts even if you don’t know that
the person you are speaking with is an introvert or an extrovert. To test rapport
with an introvert, you must ﬁrst determine that the person you are talking
with is an introvert.
I recall a case I spent months investigating. Suﬃcient personal and
biographical information was painstakingly gathered to determine what type of
personality the suspect possessed. Based on that information, I custom-
designed an investigative strategy to dovetail with the suspect’s personality. e
key to the success of the operation was our secretary. Her assignment was to
make a telephone call to the suspect that would initiate the operation. I
rehearsed with the secretary until she was comfortable with her role. She made
the telephone call but the suspect did not immediately take the bait. I
encouraged her to engage the suspect in casual conversation to reassure him.
e conversation became very casual and the suspect relaxed, and
unfortunately so did the secretary. e suspect asked the secretary where she
worked. She blurted out, “I work for the FBI.” us ended the undercover
operation. In true extroverted fashion, the secretary spoke without thinking.
PERSONALITY AND PURCHASES
If you are a salesperson, you might want to consider if your customer is an
extrovert or an introvert before making your pitch. Be sure to allow your
