BEFORE YOU START WALKING, LET THEIR FEET DO THE TALKING
All right, you’ve got a working knowledge of friend and foe signals, and you
know which ones to display and look for when dealing with strangers you want
to either approach or avoid—maybe you’ve even practiced your nonverbal
signals in front of a mirror. ere’s one more thing to consider before you
actually start speaking with anybody, and that has to do with situations where
your person of interest is not alone but already interacting with others. How
do you break in and start a conversation? When should you break in and begin
talking?
ere are times when you won’t be able to answer such questions. For
example, at business meetings or social events where people are seated at tables
or when they are moving about the room, seamlessly integrating into ongoing
conversations can be diﬃcult. However, if two or more people are standing
together and socially interacting, then you can use foot behavior to help
determine whether it is a good time to approach the group or, conversely, if it
is a better idea to delay your eﬀort to make contact. is is because observing
foot positions oﬀers clues as to which group will accept a new member and
which will be reluctant or unwilling to do so.
Members of a large group who form a semicircle with their feet pointing
toward the open side of the circle are signaling that they are willing to accept
new members. Members of a large group who form a closed circle are signaling
they are not going to be receptive to adding new individuals to their gathering.
If you see two people who are facing each other—each with their feet
pointing toward the other person—they are telegraphing the message that their
conversation is private. Stay away. ey do not want outsiders to interrupt. On
the other hand, if two people are facing each other with their feet askew, this
leaves an “opening” and sends the message that they are willing to admit a new
person to their group.
Feet telegraphing a private conversation.
Feet askew invites other people to join the conversation.
When three people face each other and their feet are pointed inward
forming a closed circle, they are nonverbally communicating an unwillingness
to accept new members.
Conversely, when three people face each other and assume a wider circle,
opening up space, they are signaling they are willing to have others join their
group.
