In my early days as an FBI agent, I fell victim to the primacy eﬀect. I was
given the task of interviewing a suspect who, my colleague informed me, had
kidnapped a four-year-old girl. Before talking to the suspect, my thoughts were
already ﬁltered through my colleague’s statement, and by the time I actually
met the man, I had already made up my mind that he was the kidnapper.
Consequently, everything the suspect said or did I viewed through my “ﬁlter”
as an indication of guilt . . . d espite ample evidence to the contrary.
e more pressure I put on the suspect, the more nervous he became, not
because he was guilty, but because I did not believe him and he thought he
would go to prison for something he didn’t do. e more nervous the suspect
became, the more it reinforced my initial belief that he was the kidnapper, and
the more pressure I applied. It was no surprise that the interview spiraled out
of control. In the end, I was embarrassed when the real kidnapper was caught.
e next time you conduct an interview, meet a new colleague, or buy a
new product, think about how you came to form your opinion about that
person or product. Chances are high that your opinions were formed by
primacy.
e acceptance of employees who transfer from one oﬃce to another often
depends on the reputation that precedes their arrival . . . just as you are
convinced that the new brand of toothpaste you purchased has to be good
because four out of ﬁve dentists recommended it.
e primacy eﬀect is powerful. Use it wisely.
ASKING A FAVOR
Good old Ben Franklin, the guy on the hundred-dollar bill, observed that if he
asked a colleague for a favor, the colleague liked him more than if he hadn’t
made the request. is phenomenon became known as (no surprise here) the
Ben Franklin eﬀect.
At ﬁrst glance, this ﬁnding seems counterintuitive. Shouldn’t you like the
person more for doing you the favor than the other way around? It turns out,
such is not the case. When a person does someone a favor, they feel good about
themselves. e Golden Rule of Friendship states that if you make a person
feel good about themselves, they will like you. us, asking someone to do you
a favor is not all about you. It is also about the person doing you the favor.
A warning, however: Do not overuse this technique, because Ben Franklin
also observed that “guests, like ﬁsh, begin to smell after three days.” (As do
people who ask too many favors!)
Returning to Ben’s encounter with Vicki, he can use this “ask a favor”
technique during his conversation with the young woman.
BEN: It takes a lot of dedication and determination to commit to a project of that magnitude.
(allowing Vicki to compliment herself)
VICKI: Yeah. (thinking) I sure am dedicated and determined. I sacriﬁced a lot to get that mega-
project done and I did a very good job if I may say so myself.
BEN: Vicki, could you do me a favor and watch my drink while I go to the bathroom? (asks for
a favor)
VICKI: Sure, no problem.
Ben addressed Vicki by her ﬁrst name (recall that people like the sound of
their name and the fact that someone remembers it) and then asked her to do
him a small favor. ese small behaviors predispose Vicki to like Ben because
people who do favors for others feel good about themselves.
COMBINING FRIENDSHIP TOOLS TO ENHANCE RELATIONSHIP
EFFECTIVENESS
Depending on the circumstances, you might ﬁnd yourself using one or a
combination of several techniques presented in this book to make a new
friend. e advantage of using several techniques together is the additional
friend-making power such combined techniques provide. To illustrate,
consider how using the primacy eﬀect, Friendship Formula, and third-party
introduction helped our military forces make friends out of people that might
well be predisposed to be wary or downright hostile toward Americans.
Winning over the hearts and minds of civilians when you are a foreigner
conducting military operations in their country can be a daunting assignment.
Combat soldiers on foreign soil, by the very nature of their work, are forced to
adopt a strategy voiced by General James “Mad Dog” Mattis, who said, “Be
polite, be professional, but have a plan to kill everybody you meet.” In other
words, making friends out of potential enemies can be a trying task.
