FOR RENT, FOR LEASE, OR NOT FOR SALE SIGNS
One of my students reported to the class that she started picking up interesting
nonverbal signals at her local bar. She frequently observed that men in
exclusively committed relationships sent out diﬀerent signals than those men
in committed relationships who were seemingly seeking extra-relationship
aﬀairs. e student commented that she could sense strong nonverbal foe
signals from some of the married men that discouraged unwanted personal
attention. But other supposedly committed men were sending out strong
friend signals that they were seeking something extra. e student noted that
these friend signals were more subtle than the friend signals transmitted by
unattached men.
THE URBAN SCOWL
Have you ever wondered why one individual seems to have the “knack” when
it comes to attracting others, making a good impression, and getting people to
like him or her, while another person, who is equally attractive and successful
in life, can’t seem to duplicate that “magnetic appeal”? It often comes down to
unconsciously sending oﬀ “foe” signals. Another student presented me with
(unfortunately for her) a great example of this. She mentioned that she was
having trouble making friends at the Midwestern college where I teach. She
said that people often remarked that she appeared cold, aloof, and
unapproachable, but that once they got to know her, she had little diﬃculty
developing close relationships with them.
As we talked, I found out she grew up in a tough and dangerous
neighborhood in Atlanta, where she had to learn from a young age to have a
very thick skin. I told her that she didn’t need to improve her communication
skills, but instead, all she had to do was change the way she presented herself to
people. She hadn’t stopped showing her “urban scowl” to the world. is is not
uncommon for people who grow up in rough neighborhoods or even just large
cities . e urban scowl sends a clear, nonverbal signal to others that you are a
foe, not a friend. It is a warning to stay away and “don’t screw with me.”
Predators are less likely to target people who project this urban scowl, so it
becomes a valuable survival tool in tough neighborhoods. Once she makes a
concerted eﬀort to send out more “friend” than “foe” signals she will have little
trouble connecting with other students.
An urban scowl.
Would you want to approach the person who is pictured wearing an urban
scowl? Keep in mind that many people who exhibit this expression are totally
unaware they are displaying foe signals that discourage others from interacting
with them. at is why an understanding of what constitutes appropriate
verbal and nonverbal friend signals is so critical.
WHEN TO SEND FOE SIGNALS
Street people are constantly seeking handouts, especially in big cities. ey can
be persistent. eir persistence is not random, though. ey target people who
are most likely to give them money, and aggressively pursue them. How do
they know who is a soft touch and who is not? Easy: ey look for friend and
foe signals. If their targets make eye contact, the odds go up. If their targets
smile, the odds go up. If their targets show pity, the odds go up.
