2. Not Paying Enough “Positive Attention” to Your Partner.
One of the unfortunate realities of long-term relationships is the natural
tendency for partners to lose some of the passion that drove them to shower
each other with attention, compliments, and “little acts of aﬀection” during
the early stages of their interaction. is is unfortunate, because human beings
never outgrow the need for positive attention. e sense that someone close to
them appreciates them and is willing to show it by performing small acts of
kindness and oﬀering compliments on a regular basis is critical to the health
and robustness of long-term relationships.
Here are some ways you can give your partner that special feeling of being
appreciated:
• Praise your partner when they do something well. It could be a problem they solved at work.
Possibly, it could involve some civic or social honor they achieved. It might even be nothing
more than they took the time to get you your special dessert at the bakery on the way home.
Let your partner know you appreciate them by praising them. e praise should never be
oﬀered to “get something” from the person being praised. It should be given only when it is
deserved and you can give it honestly. e good news is praise doesn’t cost money. All it takes is
a willingness to observe your partner so you can spot the praiseworthy behavior when it occurs
and then the eﬀort required to actually voice your positive attention.
• Don’t forget a partner’s signiﬁcant milestones such as birthdays, anniversaries, special events,
and so forth. It is remarkable what a store-bought card with a personal message included can
do to make a partner feel really good about themselves and, based on the Golden Rule of
Friendship, feel good about you as well.
• Encourage your partner to participate in decision making, particularly major decisions that
aﬀect both of you. at means including your partner in ﬁnancial planning, large purchase
decisions, occupational changes or moves, and health issues. People are more willing to go
along with whatever decision is reached in a matter if they feel they have had some say in what
is decided. is is because they feel included and have “ownership” of the idea. Not only will
they be more likely to concur and go along with a decision when they have been consulted, but
also they will do so in a more motivated, enthusiastic  manner.
• When appropriate, give “public recognition” to your partner by letting others know what
special accomplishment he or she has achieved. Although your partner might “act”
embarrassed or downplay what they have accomplished when you point this out to others
when they are present, this shouldn’t deter you in most cases. Even introverts will be amenable
to public recognition as long as it is done tastefully and not in too ﬂamboyant a style.
3. Not Rewarding Your Partner Correctly Because What You ink ey Want and What ey
Actually Want Do Not Coincide
Remember back to a holiday or birthday when, as a child, you received a
gift you really didn’t want. It was even worse if the gift came from the one
relative or friend that had the most money to spend and you were depending
on them for that new bike or wad of cash, and instead wound up with a suit or
a set of encyclopedias.
Don’t make this kind of mistake with your partner. Even if you are well-
intentioned and spend a lot of thought and eﬀort getting your special person
that special gift, it will not be appreciated if it is not something he or she
wanted in the ﬁrst place. One would think that after ten, twenty, or thirty
years or more, partners would have a good idea of what each other wants.
Amazingly, this is not always the case. e husband who buys his wife a
vacuum cleaner for Valentine’s Day is not just the stuﬀ of advertisements and
urban legends; it actually does happen.
What’s the best way to make sure that what you get someone is what he or
she wants? Ask! Or, even better, listen to what they say and you will probably
be able to detect what it is they want. Be observant. An open catalogue on the
kitchen table with an item circled in red ink might provide a clue.
One of the problems with asking a person what they want is you give them
what they desire, but it isn’t a “surprise.” One way around this, particularly
when it comes to giving gifts for holidays, is to have your partner put
suggested pictures of items they would enjoy receiving in a special box. For
instance, it could be an ad for a vacation, or a desired household item or
possibly a menu from a special restaurant. at way, the partner can choose
one of the items from the box and purchase it, and the person receiving the
gift won’t know which one to expect. e element of surprise, although not
total, does add more excitement to gift exchanges.
EMPATHY
Empathy is the ﬁnal component of CARE and a critical component of any
successful long-term relationship. Being able to sense how your partner feels,
and caring about it, is essential to maintaining a good relationship. People who
have been together for a long time have a natural advantage when it comes to
empathizing with their partner. ey have had years to learn even the most
subtle nuances of that individual’s moods, unique needs, and behavioral
idiosyncrasies.
