Voice intonation also plays a large part in conversational turn-taking.
Lowering your voice at the end of a sentence signals that you are ﬁnished
talking and it is now the other person’s turn to talk. If the speaker lowers their
voice at the end of a sentence and continues to talk, the listener will become
frustrated because they think it’s their turn to talk. Dominating a conversation
violates the Golden Rule of Friendship by keeping the focus of attention on
yourself instead of on the other person.
Conversely, taking your turn to speak when your person of interest has not
given any vocal “turn-yielding cues,” even if he or she has ﬁnished a sentence,
can impede friendship development. Violating conversation etiquette can cause
irritation and have a detrimental eﬀect on friendship development.
Make it a habit to pause for a nanosecond or two before speaking, especially
if you are an extrovert. is pause gives introverts a chance to gather their
thoughts. Remember, introverts tend to think before they speak. If you
interrupt their thought process, they tend to become frustrated and,
consequently, like you less. e pause gives extroverts time to think about what
they are about to say. is habit saved me from countless embarrassing
moments.
WHAT YOU SAY INFLUENCES HOW OTHERS PERCEIVE YOUR MESSAGE . . .
AND YOU
is seems like common sense and, to a degree, it is. But the focus here is on
saying certain things or saying them in a certain way that you might not
otherwise use to make and keep friends. Here are some verbal strategies you
can use to make or keep friends in everyday situations, strategies you might
otherwise ignore or downplay, to the detriment of your relationships.
Strategy #1: When you are right and someone else is wrong, give that
individual a face-saving way to carry out your wishes with a minimum of
embarrassment and/or humiliation. e person will like you a lot more for
your eﬀorts on their behalf.
Human beings have an inherent need to be right, but being right comes
with some unintended consequences. One of those is the loss of friendship if
the person who is right doesn’t give the person who is wrong a face-saving way
to extrica te himself or herself from the situation in question.
I learned this the hard way while presenting a lecture on report writing to a
group of parole and probation oﬃcers. Prior to the beginning of my lecture, I
spoke with several of the participants about their current report writing
practices . One participant identiﬁed his super visor as the writing guru. e
other participants agreed and made comments such as “He really knows his
stuﬀ,” “He’s a wordsmith,” “He forces us to use a variety of words to say the
same thing,” and “I don’t know what we would do without him.”
I glanced over at the supervisor. His eyes were alight and he was smiling
proudly. at conversation and the supervisor’s reaction was a red ﬂag I failed
to recognize until it was too late. e supervisor’s esteem was wrapped up in
his identity as the group’s grammar guru. His value to the agency also stemmed
from his reputation as an outstanding writer.
During my lecture, I demonstrated a simple yet eﬀective method to write
reports patterned after the FBI model for producing such documents. Several
participants commented they were going to start using this model because it
was easier and reduced the possibility of their reports being successfully
challenged in court.
I was taken aback when the supervisor protested. He argued that the
method of writing I was teaching may work for the FBI, but it was not suitable
for his agency. He declared that he was a college English major and believed
that creative reports using synonyms were more interesting than reports using
the same words over and over. I then made a fatal mistake by engaging the
supervisor in spontaneous role playing to prove that I was right and,
consequently, that he was wrong. I asked him what synonyms he would use for
the verb said. He oﬀered the following alternatives: told, explained, and
mentioned. I stopped him there and told him to play the role of a witness in
court and I would play the role of defense attorney. He agreed. e exchange
went like this:
ME (DEFENSE ATTORNEY): Oﬃcer, please deﬁne the word stated as you used it in your
report.
SUPERVISOR (OFFICER): Express a fact with certainty.
ME (DEFENSE ATTORNEY): ank you oﬃcer. How would you deﬁne the word explained as
you used the word in your report?
