communications. e results of these seeming innocuous veracity tests are not
absolute proof of deception but they do provide you with strong indicators
that someone might be lying or, at least, stretching the truth beyond acceptable
limits.
THE WELL . . . TECHNIQUE
When you ask someone a direct yes-or-no question and they begin their
answer with the “Well,” there is a high probability of deception. It indicates
that the person answering the question is about to give you an answer that they
know you are not expecting. e following exchanges will clarify the “Well”
technique.
DAD: Did you ﬁnish your homework?
DAUGHTER: Well . . .
DAD: Go to your room and ﬁnish your homework.
DAUGHTER: How did you know I didn’t do my homework?
DAD: I’m a dad. I know these things.
e dad didn’t need to wait for his daughter to ﬁnish her answer because he
knew by her use of “Well” in response to his direct question that she was about
to give him an answer she knew he was not expecting. e daughter knew her
dad was expecting a yes answer to the question “Did you do your homework?”
In another example, I interviewed a person who I thought witnessed a
murder. e person was in proximity to the crime scene, but he denied seeing
the shooting. After giving me some evasive answers, I decided to test his
veracity by asking him a direct yes-or-no question.
ME: Did you see what happened?
WITNESS: Well . . . from where I was it was hard to see much of anything. It was dark and it all
happened so fast.
I asked the witness a direct question to which he knew I expected a yes
answer. Since he began his response with “Well,” I knew he was about to give
me an answer other than yes. I let the witness ﬁnish his response so as not to
alert him to the technique.
e “Well” technique only works with direct yes-or-no questions.
Beginning a response with “Well” in answer to an open-ended question such as
“Who will win the Super Bowl next year?” indicates the person is evaluating
how to answer the question. You should allow others to ﬁnish their answers
before responding so as not to alert them to this technique. Be advised that if
the person you are talking to is aware of this technique, he or she will
deliberately avoid using “Well.”
Get into the habit of asking people a direct yes-or-no question and listening
for their response. Answering such a question with “Well” or not directly
answering the question is a strong indicator of deception, requiring additional
probing.
THE LAND OF IS
When people choose not to answer yes or no, they go to the Land of Is. e
Land of Is occupies the space between truth and deception. is murky area
contains a labyrinth of half-truths, excuses, and suppositions. President
Clinton’s now famous statement to the grand jury inspired the concept of the
Land of Is. To paraphrase what Clinton stated, “It depends upon what the
meaning of the word is is. If is means is, and never has been, that’s one thing, if
it means there is none, that was a completely true statement.” Clinton cleverly
took the prosecutor to the Land of Is to avoid directly answering the
prosecutor’s direct yes-or-no question.
e following exchange between a mother and daughter demonstrates the
Land of Is technique.
MOM: Your teacher called this afternoon and told me that she suspected you of cheating on an
exam. Did you cheat on your exam?
DAUGHTER: I spend two hours a night studying. I study more than anybody I know. People
who don’t study are the people who have to cheat on exams. I study all the time. Don’t accuse
me of cheating!
MOM: I’m not accusing you of cheating.
DAUGHTER: Yes, you are!
e mom asked her daughter a direct yes-or-no question. Her daughter
chose not to respond with a simple yes-or-no answer but, instead, took her
mother to the Land of Is to avoid directly answering it. e daughter ended
her response with an accusation, which put Mom on the defensive. e topic
