decrease will let the unwanted person down incrementally without hurting
their feelings and without seeming like an abrupt break in the relationship. In
most cases, the unwanted person will naturally come to the conclusion that the
relationship is no longer viable and seek more rewarding interactions.
RECRUITING SPIES USING A SILENT PARTNER
Imagine you are a scientist, with a top-secret clearance, working as a contractor
for the Department of Defense. One day, seemingly out of nowhere, you
receive a telephone call from a government oﬃcial from the Chinese embassy.
He invites you to come to China to give a lecture on some of your unclassiﬁed
research. All your expenses will be paid by the Chinese government. You report
this invitation to your security oﬃcer, who tells you that you can give a lecture
in China as long as you don’t discuss classiﬁed information. You call to conﬁrm
your attendance and the Chinese oﬃcial invites you to come a week earlier so
you can do some sightseeing. You agree. You are very excited because this is a
once-in-a-lifetime opportunity.
You are met at the airport by a representative from the Chinese
government, who informs you that he will be your guide and translator for
your entire trip. Each morning the translator meets you at your hotel and has
breakfast with you. You spend all day sightseeing. e translator buys all your
meals and arranges some evening social activities. e translator is friendly and
shares information about his family and social activities . You reciprocate by
sharing information about your family, nothing important, just the names of
your wife and children, their birthdays, your wedding anniversary, and the
holidays you and your family celebrate. As the days go by, you are amazed that
you and your translator have so much in common despite stark cultural
diﬀerences.
e day of the lecture arrives. e lecture hall is ﬁlled to capacity. Your
lecture is well received. At the end of the lecture, one of the participants
approaches you and says he is very interested in your research. He comments
that your research is fascinating and innovative. He poses a question relating to
the work he has been doing that relates to your research. e answer requires
you to reveal sensitive but not classiﬁed information. You gladly provide the
information along with a lengthy explanation even though it borders on the
classiﬁed realm.
While you are waiting to board your plane back to the United States, your
translator informs you that your lecture was a tremendous success and the
Chinese government would like to invite you back next year to present another
lecture. Since the small lecture hall was ﬁlled to capacity, you will be speaking
in the Grand Ballroom next year. (e Chinese translator presented an
opportunity for the scientist to ﬂatter himself, which is the most powerful
form of ﬂattery. is technique of ﬂattery will be discussed later.) Oh, and by
the way, your wife is invited to accompany you, all expenses paid.
As an FBI counterintelligence oﬃcer, I was required to debrief scientists
who went overseas to determine if they were approached by foreign
intelligence oﬃcers seeking classiﬁed information. I interviewed many
scientists who described similar stories to the one above. All the scientists
reported that the Chinese were impeccable hosts and never asked about any
classiﬁed information. No foul play. Case closed.
e one thing that bothered me was the scientists’ comments that they had
so much in common with their translators. Given the cultural diﬀerences, this
piqued my curiosity. I knew that establishing “common ground” was the
quickest way to develop rapport. (is “common ground” technique to build
rapport will be discussed in Chapter 2.)
I then used the Friendship Formula to further evaluate the scientists’ visits
to China. Certainly, proximity was present. Frequency was low, for the
scientists only went to China once a year. If frequency is low then duration
must be high in order to develop a personal relationship. Duration was high.
e same translator met the scientists early every morning and spent the entire
day and evening with them. Based on the topics of the translators’ discussions
with the scientists, intensity was high. It ﬁnally dawned on me. e scientists
were being recruited but they didn’t know it and neither did I up to that point.
e scientists and, for a while, I myself, did not see the re cruitment eﬀort.
e Chinese, knowingly or unknowingly, used the Friendship Formula, which
describes the way people naturally develop friendships. Because it is a natural
process, the brain does not attend to this subtle recruitment technique. From
that time forward, I interviewed scientists using the Friendship Formula to
