If you are having a diﬃcult time ﬁnding contemporaneous common
ground, talk about music. As mentioned earlier, the one thing that most
people have in common with each other is music. Music is a neutral topic that
most people are willing to talk about, even if their listening tastes diﬀer.
TEMPORAL EXPERIENCES
Experiences shared across time, such as attendance at the same school, military
service, or living in the same area, enhance opportunities for making friends.
You may not have shared the experiences at the same time, but you can reach
across time to seek common ground.
VICARIOUS EXPERIENCES
A vicarious experience occurs when you live out a lifestyle or activity through
the revelations of another person. You can use vicarious experiences to establish
common ground with another person even when, in reality, you know very
little about the subject matter being discussed. is approach is particularly
eﬀective because it allows your person of interest to talk about themselves and
something they most likely are interested in. is makes them feel good about
themselves, and because you are the one providing the impetus for that feeling,
you are seen in a positive light (the Golden Rule of Friendship in action). is
is a favorite technique for salespeople to use because they can ﬁnd common
ground with a customer even when they don’t know much about what the
customer is talking about. Here is an example:
CAR SALESPERSON: What do you do for a living?
CUSTOMER: I’m a baker.
CAR SALESPERSON: Really? My father was a baker.
e car salesperson doesn’t have to know anything about being a baker
because his father was a baker. You can use the same technique to seek
common ground when you meet someone for the ﬁrst time.
AUDREY: Where do you work?
SUSAN: I’m a ﬁnancial planner.
AUDREY: Interesting. My sister is an accountant.
Most of us have family members or extended family members who are
employed in the same or similar occupations as the people we speak with. In
Audrey’s case, her sister is an accountant, which is a similar ﬁeld to ﬁnancial
planning. If you don’t have a family member or relative working in the same or
similar ﬁeld as your person of interest, think of a friend who is. Using the
technique of vicarious experiences can pay dividends whenever you are trying
to establish a relationship. Exercise caution, however: Do not lie to the person
you are meeting for the ﬁrst time. If your relationship blossoms, then the truth
may be revealed. Broken trust, especially occurring at the beginning of a
relationship, can quickly turn oﬀ the Like Switch.
THE LAW OF MISATTRIBUTION
Sometimes making friends is simply a matter of being in the right place at the
right time. When people feel good about themselves and do not attribute the
good feeling to a speciﬁc cause, they tend to associate the cause of that good
feeling with the person who is physically close to them at the time. If you
happen to be that person, you’re going to beneﬁt and be liked not for anything
you did but because of the “misattribution.” In a sense, what we have here is a
case of collateral beneﬁt rather than collateral damage.
Consider this example. When people exercise, their brains release
endorphins. e release of endorphins gives these individuals a nonspeciﬁc
sense of well-being. Since the eﬀect of the endorphins is not directly attributed
to exercise, the good feeling tends to be linked to another person, if one
happens to be nearby. ink of it as the “collateral beneﬁt.” Since that good
feeling is “misattributed” to the nearby person, he or she is subconsciously seen
as the cause of the good feeling and, therefore, appears more attractive.
How can you use this information to get someone to like you? Actually, you
can take advantage of this phenomenon in a number of ways. If you are in
shape, you can arrange a meeting around an exercise activity, join a ﬁtness
club, or participate in sports (organized walks or runs—“fun” or otherwise—
provide a great opportunity for misattribution to work).
USING MISATTRIBUTION TO GET A DATE: “EXERCISE” YOUR OPTIONS
