EPILOGUE
The Friendship Formula in Practice
And as every spy knows, common enemies are how allies always begin.
—ALLY CARTER, DON’T JUDGE A GIRL BY HER COVER
Here is one ﬁnal spy story. is one didn’t involve my time at the FBI; in fact,
it is more than a hundred years old.I e story begins at the turn of the last
century, when a German prince had a romantic rendezvous with a woman of
royalty from England. e sexual nature of the rendezvous was not that
disturbing to the German government; however, they were extremely unhappy
when they discovered the prince had written his paramour love letters ﬁlled
with state secrets. ey turned to “Dr. Graves,” a talented German spy, and
gave him his marching orders: “Get those letters back!”
And so he did. He traveled to England to meet this woman and reclaim the
prince’s love letters for his homeland. Printed on the following pages are
excerpts from Dr. Graves’s diary explaining how he accomplished his mission.
As you read the material, see if you can identify the Like Switch strategies Dr.
Graves utilized to successfully retrieve the letters.
I quartered myself at ﬁrst at the Russell Square Hotel, in a few days
transferring to the patrician Langham. I began by making tentative
inquiries. I purchased all society papers which I read from cover to cover,
and then carefully feeling my way put further questions that would locate
the set in which my lady was a central ﬁgure. From acquaintances I made
around the hotel, from the society reporters of newspapers, I began to get
little scraps of information. Fortunately, it was the season in London and
everybody was coming into town. I soon knew who the Lady’s intimates
were and their favorite rendezvous. e next step was to become familiar
with the personality of the lady and to gain some idea as to her habits and
her likes and dislikes. I heard that the lady was in the habit of going
horseback riding in Hyde Park. Every day I made it my business to take a
two hour canter along the bridle path. My patience was rewarded on the
ﬁfth morning for I saw her galloping by with a party of friends.
e next morning I was on the bridle path at the same hour. Finally,
she came galloping along with the same group, and after they had almost
gone from sight, I galloped after them. I found out where they kept their
horses and after they had dismounted, I sauntered up to the stable and
made inquiries. I learned that they always went out at the same time of
day. ereafter, I made it my business to pass the lady on the bridle path
day after day. I pride myself on few things, but my horsemanship is one
of them. Many a hard tussle and bleeding nose I got riding Brumbies
(wild horses) across the wild tracks of Australia. I also learned a trick or
two among my Tuareg friends, which I exhibited for the lady’s beneﬁt on
various occasions. I did not hope to gain an introduction, but only to
attract attention and familiarize her party with my appearance, applying
one of the test points of human psychology. I employed the theory of the
subconscious attraction of an oft seen though unknown face.
I soon ascertained that my lady and her friends followed all the whims
of London society. One in particular interested me. ey were in the
habit of frequenting Carlton Terrace between three and four every
afternoon and eating strawberries. I also went to eat straw berries.
Carlton Terrace during the strawberry season is an exquisitely colored
fashion plate of life’s butterﬂies and drones. is throng of fashion and
beauty, marked with its air of distinction carelessly abandoned to
pleasure, ever murmuring pleasant nothings and tossing light persiﬂage
from table to table, is truly an interesting study of the lighter sides of life.
One sits on a magniﬁcent marquee-covered glass enclosed terrace
overlooking the ames with its ever changing scenes of fussy tugs and
squat barges.
At Carlton Terrace one pays well for the subtleties of eating. By
courteous consideration of the waitresses, I managed to secure a much
