and concerts. e more time (duration) you spend with people, the more you are able to
inﬂuence their decision-making process and thought patterns.
5. In both cases intensity was achieved through the use of nonverbal cues and a “curiosity hook.”
e constant presence of a stranger being around Seagull and the English lady aroused their
curiosity. In the case of Dr. Graves, the “Strawberry Stunt” served as a curiosity hook. What
type of man eats ﬁve servings of strawberries in one sitting and gives the waitstaﬀ such a large a
tip? Who was this person? What did he want? is curiosity motivated both Seagull and the
English lady to make an eﬀort to discover who Charles (the FBI agent) and Graves (the
German spy) were and what they wanted. Dr. Graves noted, “If you glance at her under
favorable conditions such as my strawberry ‘stunt’ had created for me [increased intensity], she
will return the glance. You both half smile and do not look at each other again that afternoon.”
When Dr. Graves ﬁrst met the lady, she displayed a “hair ﬂip” (the toss of her head), which is a
friend signal indicating that Dr. Graves established some degree of rapport before their ﬁrst
words were spoken. Both Charles and Graves had conﬁdence in the psychological principles
they employed and allowed time for them to work. ey did not rush the development of the
relationship. Instead, they let the relationships develop naturally over time, as “normal”
relationships would.
6. In both cases, Dr. Graves and the Special Agent used friend signals to present themselves as
nonthreatening (see Chapter 1), thus preventing their targets from going shields up when the
ﬁrst meetings took place. e Special Agent did not approach Seagull until he was comfortable
with the agent’s presence. Dr. Graves sat alone in the restaurant and showed no desire to meet
anyone, giving the illusion that he was not a threat. Dr. Graves also ensured that he was
noticed by walking in after the lady and her friends were already seated.
7. In both cases, information was gathered about their targets from various sources. In the Seagull
case, the agent received information from FBI analysts. In the case of Dr. Graves, he read local
newspapers, society pages, spoke with reporters, and later the groomsmen at the stables to
obtain information about his target. In both cases, vital information was gathered
surreptitiously to discover the things that motivate the targets to act as they do, to assess their
personalities, and to learn about the things that could be used to establish common ground.
Dr. Graves used elicitation techniques (see Chapter 6) to obtain sensitive information about his
target without alerting the elicitation sources to the fact that they were providing sensitive
information.
8. Dr. Graves went to the Carlton Terrace not only to be close to his target but also to establish
common ground by eating strawberries every day like his target did.
9. Dr. Graves took advantage of the psychological principle of misattribution (see Chapter 4) to
predispose the lady to like him. Horseback riding, like other exercises, triggers an endorphin
release, which makes people feel good about themselves. If there is no apparent reason for that
good feeling, people tend to attribute their good feeling to the people nearest to them.
According the Golden Rule of Friendship, if you want people to like you, make them feel good
about themselves. Dr. Graves was fostering rapport before he even said a word to his target.
10. In the end, Dr. Graves made it appear that it was the lady’s idea to exchange the letters for her
accrued debt, not Dr. Graves’s idea. In Seagull’s case, he watered and fertilized the seed of
treason planted by the FBI agent. is is the true sign of a successful operation.
e two spy stories, separated by a century, remind us that human nature is
a constant and that friends can be made if you are willing to use the tools
presented in this book to ﬂip the Like Switch and turn people on to you.
I. A. K. Graves, e Secrets of the German War Oﬃce (New York: McBride, Nast, 1914).
