• Emerging incompatibilities. As relationships develop, so do the persons in the relationship.
is can lead to problems, should one party to the relationship develop behaviors unacceptable
to the other. For example, one partner in a relationship might start drinking or gambling too
much, or show less interest in sex, or become more reclusive, even start snoring (to the dismay
of their light-sleeping mate).
e good news is that many, if not all, of these problems can be overcome
through mutual eﬀort or counseling if the people involved are committed to
staying together and are willing to do what it takes to repair the relationship
and make it whole.
Even the best of friends can have the worst of arguments!
Good relationships, short or long term, take eﬀort to bloom. Like the
gardener who wants his plants and trees to fully blossom, you must nurture
relationships with care, patience, and loving under standing if you want them
to ﬂower. Relationships can’t be left to die at the ﬁrst sign of blight. You need
to be convinced that you’ve done as much as you can to save a relationship
before you consider ending it.
IN CASE OF DIVORCE . . . BREAK GLASS
I was once given a wonderful piece of advice that I pass on to young couples
whenever I can: When relationships are still new, vibrant, and full of love,
write letters to each other. Pour your hearts out and go into great detail about
what you like and admire about the other person. But don’t share the letters.
Instead, place them in separate sealed envelopes with your partner’s name on
the front. en place the letters in a box, which you’ll want to store in a safe
place.
In the event the relationship goes sour, you can give each other the letters
and read them. is emotional reminder may be enough to recharge the
feelings of love and jump-start a new era of togetherness. e letters can also
be used as an emotional icebreaker to motivate you to resolve any major issues
where you are at an impasse and need “something” to get you and your partner
back on track toward solving your problem(s).
One man I mentioned this idea to actually made a wooden container with a
glass front similar to a ﬁre alarm box found in many buildings. He then aﬃxed
a little metal hammer to the box with a metal chain. e sign on the box read,
“In case of divorce, break glass.” e letters in the box served as a constant
reminder to the couple of the reasons they liked and admired each other when
they ﬁrst fell in love. In the middle of a ﬁght or escalating disagreement, either
one of them could comment, “Is it time to break the glass?” is not-so- subtle
reminder quickly deescalated the ﬁght or disagreement and helped the couple
resolve their conﬂict successfully.
