Attractiveness is a tangible beneﬁt for those who possess it. Even though it is
said that “beauty is in the eye of the beholder,” the reality is that every culture
has widely accepted standards of what is “attractive.” Although these standards
might change over time, most members of the culture internalize the
prevailing, current norm of what is considered beautiful or handsome.
Attractiveness is not “absolute.” You can become more attractive if you are
willing to put some eﬀort into achieving such a goal. According to Gordon
Wainwright, author of Teach Yourself Body Language, anyone can increase their
attractiveness to others if they maintain good eye contact, act upbeat, dress
well, add a dash of color to their wardrobe, and listen well. Wainwright also
stresses the importance of posture and bearing and suggests that for one week
you stand straight, tuck in your stomach, hold your head high, and smile at
those you meet. From the results of many experiments, Wainwright predicts
you will begin to be treated with more warmth and respect and start  attracting
more people to you.
Attractive people are seen as having more positive attributes. Good-looking
men and women are generally judged to be more talented, kind, honest, and
intelligent than their less attractive counter parts. Controlled studies show that
people go out of their way to help attractive people, of the same or opposite
sex, because they want to be liked and accepted by good-looking people.
Attractiveness can have ﬁnancial implications. On a scale of less attractive to
more attractive, less attractive people earn 5 to 10 percent less than individuals
of average looks, who in turn earned 3 to 8 percent less than those deemed
good-looking. Studies also show attractive students get more attention and
higher evaluations from their teachers. Good-looking patients get more
personalized care from their doctors, and attractive criminals receive lighter
sentences than less attractive lawbreakers. One need look no further than
Hollywood to see the impact beautiful movie stars have on our system of
justice.
THE LAW OF HUMOR
Individuals who use humor in social encounters are perceived as more likable.
In addition, both trust and attraction increase when a lighthearted approach is
used during person-to-person interactions. Judicious use of humor can reduce
anxiety and establish a relaxed mood that helps a relationship to develop more
rapidly. A slightly risqué joke can help to escalate the level of intimacy in a
ﬂirtatious conversation. Of course, as is the case with any verbal
communication, the speaker must be sure that the words, or, in this case, the
humor used, is appropriate and will not be perceived as oﬀensive by the
listener.
e added beneﬁt to using humor is that laughing causes a release of
endorphins, which makes you feel good about yourself, and, according to the
Golden Rule of Friendship, if you make people feel good about themselves,
they will like you. A woman who likes a particular man will laugh at his jokes,
no matter how lame, more often and with more gusto than she will laugh at
jokes told by a man in whom she has little romantic interest. is
phenomenon further supports the Golden Rule of Friendship.
THE LAW OF FAMILIARITY
e more we meet and interact with people, the more likely we are to become
friends. Behavioral scientist Leon Festinger and two colleagues studied
relationships in a small two-story apartment building. ey found that
neighbors were most likely to be friends. e residents who were least likely to
be friends were on separate ﬂoors. ose residents near ground-ﬂoor staircases
and mailboxes had friends on both ﬂoors.
e Law of Familiarity points to the importance of proximity
(a component of the Friendship Formula) in aﬀecting relationships. People
who share the same physical space are more likely to be attracted to one
another. Proximity predisposes one person to like another person, even before
they are formally introduced. Classroom seating charts can be good predictors
of which students will become attracted to one another. In my class, I’ve
observed that students who sit in the vicinity of each other are more likely to
become friends as opposed to students who sit on opposite sides of the
classroom. Likewise, in professional settings, romances and friendships can be
predicted based on who sits next to whom.
