“In case of divorce, break glass.” e letters in the box served as a constant
reminder to the couple of the reasons they liked and admired each other when
they ﬁrst fell in love. In the middle of a ﬁght or escalating disagreement, either
one of them could comment, “Is it time to break the glass?” is not-so- subtle
reminder quickly deescalated the ﬁght or disagreement and helped the couple
resolve their conﬂict successfully.
8
THE PERILS AND PROMISE OF
RELATIONSHIPS IN A DIGITAL WORLD
Online everyone can be who they want to be. It only gets tricky when you meet them in the
real world.
—TOKII.COM
is is a true story. A love story of sorts, one that could only happen in our
digital age. It involves a then-sixty-eight-year-old professor and a Czech bikini
model. is particular academician was not lacking in brainpower: He worked
as a theoretical particle physicist at the University of North Carolina, Chapel
Hill, where he had been employed for three decades.
e professor, still lonely after his recent divorce, visited some online dating
sites, where he connected with the Czech beauty. After a ﬂurry of emails, chat
room sessions, and instant messages, it became obvious to the professor that
the stunning model wanted to give up her career and marry him. It never
seemed to cross his mind that the woman on the Internet might have been an
imposter or why a young, attractive model would choose him as a husband.
Sadly, he found out why, the hard way. After many unsuccessful attempts by
the professor to speak with the young woman on the phone, she agreed to go
from virtual reality to real life. All the professor had to do was ﬂy down to
Bolivia, where she was currently working, and meet her. is he readily agreed
to do. e rest of the story is almost too painful to relate.
Upon arriving late in Bolivia due to a ticketing problem, the professor
discovered that his “girlfriend” had already left. However, she told him not to
worry, she would send him a ticket to Brussels, Belgium, where he could join
her while she did a photo shoot. Her only request was to bring along a bag that
