In an attempt to win over the Afghan people, I was a member of a team
that was asked to “show our guys [American forces] how to be less threatening
yet, at the same time, maintain their battleﬁeld awareness.”
So how do you go about making someone appear friendly when everything
they wear appears threatening (battle gear, helmets, gun belts) and they are
taught to scowl (their “game face”) when dealing with the local populace? It’s
no wonder that when these soldiers come into a local village the native
population takes one look, sees foe signals, and goes shields up.
is is what we told the military to do: Go into the villages with the same
battle gear and a readiness to defend yourself if attacked but also do the
following:
1. Employ the Friendship Formula: Spend some time in the village without really doing
anything . . . just be there. is satisﬁes the condition of proximity. en, over time, increase
the number (frequency) of visits to the village and the amount of time (duration) spent there.
Finally, add intensity to the mix by giving the children of the village things they like (more on
this in a moment).
2. Send out “friend” rather than “foe” signals: Keep your game face but put a mask over it; in other
words, smile, don’t scowl.
3. Once the villagers are used to seeing you acting in a nonthreatening way, load up a truck with
soccer balls and drive into the village where the children can see you. What will happen? Because
you’re sending out friend signals, the children won’t see you as a threat and, further, their
curiosity will be aroused (intensity) and they’ll approach the truck and ask, “Who are those
balls all for?” e driver of the truck can tell the children, “ey’re for you!” en give them
away.
So, what happens? e kids like you. So when they see their parents, the
kids serve as a third-party introduction on behalf of the Americans. ey say,
“I saw the Americans, they gave us soccer balls, and they are nice people.” So
now the parents see you through the primacy ﬁlter created by their children
and they are more open to seeing you as a friend rather than as “the enemy.”
If the Americans had simply come into the village without employing the
Friendship Formula (no attempt to establish proximity, frequency, duration,
and intensity), sending foe rather than friend signals and not using the primacy
eﬀect through third-party introductions, what do you think would have
happened when the American forces told the village elders they weren’t a
threat? e Americans simply wouldn’t have been believed. e soldiers would
have been perceived as liars.
It is amazing how easy it is to inﬂuence people’s behavior using these
friendship tools. Alone or in combination, they allow you to make people feel
better about themselves and, in turn, encourage them to make you feel better
as well. When you employ the Golden Rule of Friendship, it encourages
reciprocity: “If you make me happy, I want to make you happy.” Even in
onetime encounters, when you are interacting with a person you will probably
never see again, you can witness this reciprocity in action.
THE CHOICE BETWEEN FLYING FIRST CLASS OR BEING GROUNDE D FOR
BEING GRUMPY
Several years ago, I had a layover in Frankfurt, Germany. I wasn’t looking
forward to the rest of my ﬂight; I had the middle seat in coach and the
scheduled ﬂying time was eight hours. I certainly didn’t want to board early,
and with an hour to spare, I decided to put the time to good use. I pulled up
every German word I could remember from my high school language class and
walked over to the ticket agent. As I approached, I gave the major friend
signals, the eyebrow ﬂash, the smile, the head tilt. When I got to the counter, I
said “Guten tag . . .” so we would have some “common ground” (see Chapter
4). He smiled at my amateur attempt to speak the language but returned the
greeting, and then said in English, “Can I help you?”
I answered no but began to engage him in conversation. I used empathic
statements to encourage him to speak and to make him feel good about
himself. As the conversation progressed, spurred on by my brief empathic
comments, he was doing almost all of the talking. He didn’t notice this because
people see the world as revolving around them and thus my behavior did not
stray outside the human baseline and cause an “alert” reaction in his brain. I
gave him an excuse to talk; in fact, I encouraged it and it made him feel good.
So now he likes me.
At the end of our “conversation,” the agent asked me why I didn’t board the
plane. I told him that I had a middle seat and I wanted to spend as little time
as possible jammed in there. at was it.
About twenty minutes later, the ticket agent made a ﬁnal boarding call. As I
walked to the air bridge, I heard the agent call out, “Herr Schafer.” I stopped
