APPENDIX
Answers to “What Do You See” Quiz (page 181)
Picture 1: e foe signal depicted in the photo is the young lady yawning.
However, this signal might not indicate that the young lady is bored with the
young man. You should use an empathic statement to discover the source of
her yawn.
Picture 2: e three friend signals depicted in the photo are (a) full smile; (b)
head tilt; (c) mutual gaze. Also appropriate: (d) Open body posture.
Picture 3: e additional friend signal not found in picture #2 is the “palms up”
displays in both the young man and woman.
Picture 4: e asynchronous posture between the two individuals signals poor
rapport.
Picture 5: e young lady is leaning in and smiling, indicating interest; however,
the young man, with his armed crossed and leaning backward, signals he is not
interested in her.
Picture 6: e young man, smiling and leaning forward, indicates interest in the
young lady, who, by her closed body posture (arms crossed) and skeptical eye
signal, does not share his interest.
Picture 7: e friend signal indicating good rapport is “preening” (grooming your
partner). In this case, it is the young lady straightening the collar of the young
man’s shirt.
Picture 8: e young man is interested in the young lady based on his full smile
and leaning-in, open posture. Unfortunately, based on the young lady’s torso
position, she probably doesn’t share the young man’s feelings, although in this
case one would want to see a bit more of the girl’s nonverbal behaviors before
ruling out any possible interest.
Picture 9: e rapport between the two individuals is very good. is can be seen
in the (a) shared enthusiasm; (b) torso positioning: inward lean and open; (c)
expressive gestures (including “thumbs-up” sign); (d) prolonged eye contact;
and (e) smiles.
Picture 10: At ﬁrst glance, it looks like the young man is in charge because he is
pointing his ﬁnger. However, note that he is leaning backward. (Pointing a
ﬁnger at someone while leaning backward is counterintuitive, you don’t stick
your ﬁnger in someone’s face and lean away if you feel you’re in charge.) e
young lady is displaying “arms akimbo” (an aggressive nonverbal signal) in an
attempt to make up for the young man’s height advantage. e young lady has
her head tilted, with the carotid artery exposed, signaling that she is not afraid
of the young man. Diagnosis: e young man is on the losing end of this
interaction based on his backward lean and the young lady’s nonverbal
posturing, which indicates a lack of fear based on her aggressive stance.
