you wanted them to make and, at the same time, feel you treated them with
respect. O ne couldn’t hope for a better outcome to an angry confrontation.
WHEN RELATIONSHIPS “GO SOUTH” EVEN AFTER YOU’VE TRIED TO SAVE
THEM
If you utilize the tools described in this book to establish and maintain healthy,
happy relationships, you will almost always be successful. But what if, even
after your best eﬀorts, a short- or long-term relationship goes bad? What then?
Particularly with long-term interactions, where a signiﬁcant amount of time
and commitment has already been invested in the relationship, one would
hope relationships would not be casually discarded at the ﬁrst signs of distress.
And, in fact, they usually aren’t. Most individuals enter into marriages and
other forms of long-term relationships with the intention of staying in them.
Yet there are times when even well-intentioned and responsible individuals
ﬁnd it diﬃcult, if not impossible, to remain in a long-term relationship. Why?
ere are many reasons, but some of the most common include:
• A divergence of interests. Individuals who might have shared the same outlook and career
paths in their twenties may have diﬀerent perspectives thirty years later. A new career or life
focus can weigh heavily on a long-term relationship if both parties are not seeing eye to eye on
the change(s) involved.
• e “empty nest” syndrome. When children leave the nest, one or both of the parents
sometimes choose the same option.
• e need for more freedom. Couples who have been together for a long time, particularly if
they married young, sometimes feel “trapped” and yearn for the freedom they see their single
friends enjoying. is is a classic case of “the grass is greener” syndrome. Married people yearn
for the freedom that single people have and single people yearn for the commitment that
married people enjoy.
• e need for change. Ever wonder why people in their late sixties and seventies opt to end
long-term relationships? Sometimes it is simply the recognition that one doesn’t live forever
and that if one desires the chance to experience a diﬀerent lifestyle, the window of opportunity
is closing fast.
• Changes in personality in one or both partners. Our personalities are not static or set in
stone by the time we are adolescents. We change over time and if these changes drive people
apart, they usually end up parting.
• ird-party disruptions. Behavioral scientists have long debated the issue of whether humans
are “naturally” monogamous. While they continue to argue, long-term relationships continue
to crumble due to inﬁdelity and partner replacement with a new love interest.
• Boredom. Too much of the same thing can create boredom, an accelerant for relationship
breakdowns, which can make once-exciting interactions seem mundane and unsatisfying.
• Emerging incompatibilities. As relationships develop, so do the persons in the relationship.
is can lead to problems, should one party to the relationship develop behaviors unacceptable
to the other. For example, one partner in a relationship might start drinking or gambling too
much, or show less interest in sex, or become more reclusive, even start snoring (to the dismay
of their light-sleeping mate).
e good news is that many, if not all, of these problems can be overcome
through mutual eﬀort or counseling if the people involved are committed to
staying together and are willing to do what it takes to repair the relationship
and make it whole.
Even the best of friends can have the worst of arguments!
Good relationships, short or long term, take eﬀort to bloom. Like the
gardener who wants his plants and trees to fully blossom, you must nurture
relationships with care, patience, and loving under standing if you want them
to ﬂower. Relationships can’t be left to die at the ﬁrst sign of blight. You need
to be convinced that you’ve done as much as you can to save a relationship
before you consider ending it.
IN CASE OF DIVORCE . . . BREAK GLASS
I was once given a wonderful piece of advice that I pass on to young couples
whenever I can: When relationships are still new, vibrant, and full of love,
write letters to each other. Pour your hearts out and go into great detail about
what you like and admire about the other person. But don’t share the letters.
Instead, place them in separate sealed envelopes with your partner’s name on
the front. en place the letters in a box, which you’ll want to store in a safe
place.
In the event the relationship goes sour, you can give each other the letters
and read them. is emotional reminder may be enough to recharge the
feelings of love and jump-start a new era of togetherness. e letters can also
be used as an emotional icebreaker to motivate you to resolve any major issues
where you are at an impasse and need “something” to get you and your partner
back on track toward solving your problem(s).
One man I mentioned this idea to actually made a wooden container with a
glass front similar to a ﬁre alarm box found in many buildings. He then aﬃxed
a little metal hammer to the box with a metal chain. e sign on the box read,
