SUBORDINATE: I was reviewing your latest policy and noticed something. I’d like your advice
on the matter.
BOSS: Sure. Let me take a look.
e subordinate can now point out the discrepancies in the policy and her
supervisor has the opportunity to clarify his mistake without losing face.
Salespeople can use the same technique when they meet longtime customers
or new customers. Textbook publisher representatives regularly visit my oﬃce
pitching new books for use in my classes. Instead of personalizing their sales
approach, they tell me how their book is better than the one I am currently
using. e sales rep could be right, but there are unintended consequences of
such an approach. e salesperson is implying that my judgment in picking
textbooks is bad. is realization does not make me feel good about myself. I
would be more likely to listen to the representatives if they introduced
themselves and then said, “Professor, I would like to get your advice about this
new book designed for use in your course.”
THE FACE-SAVING TECHNIQUE THAT AVOIDED A MUG SHOT
As an FBI agent, I always dreaded the moment I would be ﬂying somewhere
on a long-awaited vacation and be called upon to deal with an unruly
passenger or handle a crisis. Well, it happened on a 6 a.m. ﬂight out of Los
Angeles. I had boarded and was sitting quietly in my seat when a ﬂight
attendant came up and said there was a drunk passenger in the back of the
plane whom the captain wanted oﬄoaded. I looked around and, sure enough,
there was a passenger staggering in the aisle while another ﬂight attendant was
yelling at him. “You get oﬀ this ﬂight . . . you’re an idiot.” So much for trying
to calm things down. e attendant standing over me said, “You’re an FBI
agent, take him oﬀ the plane.”
I thought, “I might as well use a bit of my training.” So I walked over to
where the man was leaning against his seat. I told him I was an FBI agent,
showed him my badge and credentials, and suggested we both sit down and
talk. He wasn’t so drunk that he failed to understand me. He sat down and I
edged into the empty seat next to him.
“Look,” I said, in a soft voice that would be diﬃcult for other passengers to
hear, “the endgame is you’re getting oﬀ this plane. When the captain says
you’re getting oﬀ, you’re getting oﬀ. Now, you have a choice. Either you can
walk oﬀ and keep your dignity, voice your complaints once you’re in the
terminal, and complete your trip to Dallas on a later ﬂight . . . or I’m going to
arrest you, put you in handcuﬀs, and forcibly take you oﬀ the plane. en
you’re going to go to jail, have to bail yourself out, and come back here for a
trial, where you might be sentenced to prison. So,” I whispered to him, “sir, the
choice is yours. I’ll allow you to make this decision. Take a few seconds to
think about it. W hat do you want to do?”
It only took a moment for the passenger to say, “I think I’ll just get oﬀ,
make my complaint, and get on another plane.”
I said, “I think that’s a very intelligent decision. Here, I’ll be glad to walk
you oﬀ.”
After I had accompanied the man to the terminal and returned to my seat,
the ﬂight attendant who had spoken to me earlier came up and wanted to
know how I had managed to end such an ugly confrontation so peacefully. I
told her I had given the passenger the opportunity to make a choice on his
own.
I gave him the opportunity to feel he had some control in the  situation,
that he was free to choose his fate. And, most important, I provided him with
a face-saving way to exit th e aircraft with a minimum of embarrassment.
FOOD FOR THOUGHT
Giving someone the feeling they have some control over a situation can work wonders, even with children. In
fact, parents can use this approach to help their kids make decisions, especially when they are younger.
Children, like adults, want to feel as though they are in control of their lives. The illusion of control can be
conveyed if parents give their kids an opportunity to choose their destiny. This can be accomplished without
losing parental authority. For example, you are taking your son out to lunch. You have already made up your
mind that you are either going to McDonald’s or Burger King for a kid’s meal. You don’t want to let your child
choose another restaurant, yet, you still want him to practice his decision-making skills. This can be
accomplished by setting up an alternate response question such as “We are going to lunch. Do you want to go
to McDonald’s or Burger King for a kid’s meal?” An alternate response question gives your child an illusion of
control, but you are really in control because you limited the restaurant choice to McDonald’s or Burger King and
you limited the food choice to a kid’s meal.
