Let’s assume you want to ask a person of interest on a date and want to
increase your chances of getting a positive response. Using the Law of
Misattribution might do the trick. If you discover that the person you want to
meet jogs or exercises regularly, arrange for a “chance meeting” during or
shortly after he or she completes their exercise regimen. e encounter does
not have to include a verbal exchange. Simply sharing the same space can
induce misattribution and will make you appear more attractive. If both you
and your person of interest work out, try to arrange your workout time to
coincide with theirs. Being nearby during the exercise will produce the
collateral beneﬁts already discussed. If the person you want to meet is a
coworker who exercises, be in the vicinity of their oﬃce or cubicle when they
return from their physical activit y. Likewise, if you know the person you are
interested in goes to a coﬀee shop every day after his or her exercise routine,
make sure you are present at the shop at the time they arrive.
What you are trying to do is take advantage of the misattribution principle
and increase your attractiveness in the eyes of the other person by being
associated with the good feelings that come about through the release of
exercise-related endorphins. To accomplish this objective, you need to be in
close physical proximity to the person during or soon after the endorphins are
released.
Surprisingly, misattribution also occurs when people experience frightening
events or traumatic experiences. People feel closer relationships with others
with whom they share the same frightening or traumatic experiences. Soldiers
who survive harrowing battles form deep bonds with their comrades in arms.
Police oﬃcers develop close relationships with their partners after they share
traumatic experiences. In the days when it was allowed (or tolerated), “hazing”
of sorority and fraternity pledges brought those who survived the ordeal closer
together and often created lasting friendships.
A scary movie can evoke the same response. If you go with someone to a
scary movie, the shared frightful experience triggers misattribution, which in
turn increases attraction between the moviegoers. For that reason, arranging to
see a scary movie is ideal for a ﬁrst date because it increases the chance for
mutual attraction in a new relationship. Likewise, if your long-term
relationship with someone is waning, go skydiving or bungee jumping, ride a
roller coaster, or pursue other activities that create the perception of danger.
e shared experience will bring you closer together and reinvigorate your
friendship or romance.
THE LAW OF CURIOSITY
Curiosity can be used as a “hook” to increase intensity (Friendship Formula)
and pique a person’s interest in you. It is an eﬀective way to make friends. All
creatures capable of more than a mere mechanical response to stimuli are
curious. It is a biological imperative, driven by the need for self-preservation,
reproduction, and greed. Humans want to know everything: who we are, who
others are, where we came from and when, what’s on the other side of the hill,
and the shape, size, composition, longevity, and distance of everything from
quarks to the universe.
In order to survive, animals above the primitive level must understand the
niche in which they live. In addition, they must discover any changes in that
niche to be able to respond to them appropriately and eﬀectively. Since it is
personal survival that the individual is concerned about, the changes in the
immediate vicinity—those that will aﬀect him or her personally—are the most
important.
e most eﬀective way to discover changes is to go looking for them. us,
a noise in the bushes draws the cat’s attention, followed by a slow, stealthy stalk
(no sense charging into trouble). e noise might be prey, it might be a
predator, or it could be the automatic sprinkler coming on. is curiosity can
lead to a meal, a timely escape, or an inadvertent bath. In any case, it must be
investigated.
When you behave in a manner that produces curiosity in another person, it
signiﬁcantly increases the chances that individual will want to interact with
you in an attempt to satisfy their curiosity. us, a “curiosity hook” becomes
an eﬀective tool to meet a person of interest and develop a friendship. I used
the Law of Curiosity regularly as an FBI agent to enhance my recruiting
eﬀectiveness of foreign nationals. At one point during my FBI career, a North
Korean moved into my jurisdiction. ere was reason to suspect he was an
agent for his government and I was given the assignment to try to get the guy
