3
THE GOLDEN RULE OF FRIENDSHIP
You can make more friends in two months by becoming genuinely interested in other
people than you can in two years by trying to get other people interested in you.
—DALE CARNEGIE
e nonverbal friend signals you learned in the previous chapter are designed
to set the stage for the start of a positive relationship with another person.  ey
function like a comedian whose warm-up act is designed to get the audience in
the right frame of mind before the headliner makes his appearance. Used
correctly, these signals will make your person of interest more receptive to
interacting with you, should you choose to approach and speak with them. So
let’s assume you do choose to make contact with somebody. What now? You
have reached your “moment of truth” with them.
MAKING YOUR “MOMENT OF TRUTH” A SUCCESS
Many years ago, a businessman named Jan Carlzon was named CEO of a
struggling European airline company, Scandinavian Airlines System (SAS), and
given the formidable task of making it proﬁtable. He accomplished this
objective with such speed that his feat became the focal point of management
cases and literature highlighting business turnarounds.
How did he achieve such success? By giving his frontline staﬀ the power to
solve customer service problems on the spot, without having to check with
their supervisors ﬁrst. is greatly improved customer satisfaction, employee
morale, and corporate proﬁt . . . a  win-win situation for all involved.
What was interesting about Carlzon’s philosophy and business strategy, as it
relates to this book, is the importance he put on the point of contact between
two individuals. In fact, he called it a “moment of truth” because it was these
moments that shaped a customer’s view of the company and helped determine
if they would purchase SAS services. Carlzon observed: “Last year each of our
ten million customers came in contact with approximately ﬁve SAS employees.
ese 50 million ‘moments of truth’ are the moments that ultimately
determine whether SAS will succeed or fail as a company. ey are the
moments when we must prove to our customers that SAS is their best
alternative.”
When you meet another person for the ﬁrst time, it is a deﬁning moment
of truth in how that relationship will develop. Will that person treat you like a
friend or shun you like a foe? e Golden Rule of Friendship—If you want people
to like you, make them feel good about  themselves—can be a deciding factor in
which side the person puts you on.
Unlike some of the techniques that will be presented later, which only
become relevant when you are looking for long-term relationships rather than
brief or sporadic interactions, the Golden Rule of Friendship serves as the key
to all successful relationships, whether they are of short, medium, or long
duration.
Do not underestimate the power and importance of this rule in making
friends. As an FBI Special Agent, I was required to meet people from every
station in life and convince them to provide sensitive information, become
spies, or confess to a variety of crimes. e key to the successful completion of
these daunting tasks was my ability to get people to not only like me but to
trust me and, in many cases, trust me with their lives. e most diﬃcult task
facing new Special Agents bent on getting people to like them is developing
this vital skill. Agents often approached me and asked me to teach them the
techniques to get people to like them instantly. And I gave them the exact same
instruction: If you want people to like you, make them feel good about themselves.
You must focus your attention on the person you are befriending. It sounds
easy, but it takes practice even for trained agents. If you make someone feel
good about themselves, they will credit you with helping them attain that good
feeling. People gravitate toward individuals who make them happy and tend to
avoid people who bring them pain or discomfort.
