weight scored further from the mean lied more about their degree of obesity.
Likewise, men whose height scored further from the mean lied more about
how tall they were. e survey respondents reported that they were more likely
to lie about their photographs than in relationship information such as marital
status and the number of children they have.
In a follow-up study by Hancock and Toma, they found that about one-
third of the online photographs examined were not accurate. Women’s
photographs were judged as less accurate than men’s photographs. Women
were more likely to be older than they were portrayed in their photographs.
eir photographs were more likely to be Photoshopped or taken by
professional photographers. Additionally, less attractive people were more likely
to enhance their proﬁle. e most interesting ﬁnding was that although people
frequently lied in their online proﬁles, they attempted to keep their alterations
within believable parameters in the event they met their correspondents in
subsequent face-to-face meetings.
e magnitude of deception in online proﬁles should not come as a big
surprise. An online proﬁle is the equivalent of a ﬁrst date. Anyone who has
been on a ﬁrst date will remember putting his or her best foot forward. (Just as
in a ﬁrst job interview, we wear our “interview” suit.) Women dressed with
great contemplation and took extra minutes to put on their makeup. Men
ensured their clothes were color- coordinated and wrinkle-free. Conversations
were rehearsed before any words were exchanged. Personality ﬂaws and
behavioral quirks were carefully camouﬂaged with polite talk and impeccable
manners. e extra steps were taken to make the right ﬁrst impression.
Putting your best foot forward when meeting someone is not construed as
deception because the foot put forward still is recognizably yours, albeit an
enhanced version. People who present themselves on the Internet should try to
put a positive face on their proﬁle, but remain within the bounds of truth
when including a photograph and a description of who they are. Likewise,
people who use the Internet to search for potential relationships should learn
to take online proﬁles with a grain of salt, recognizing that the person they are
scrutinizing is never going to appear more attractive or qualiﬁed than the
picture and résumé they post.
Men and women feel the need to meet standards of beauty that society
establishes, and which are reinforced by the media. People lie to bring
themselves closer to the standard image in the hope of attracting a friend or a
mate. People who believe they do not meet those standards feel less attractive
and are less conﬁdent that they can attract and keep a partner without lying
about who they really are and how they really look. is pattern will not
change in the foreseeable future; to the contrary, it will most likely intensify as
online dating and Internet chat rooms become more popular and proliferate.
Anyone who seeks relationships on the Internet should be aware of the line
that separates a “best impression” proﬁle from a deceptive one. A deceptive
online proﬁle may attract a suitor or friend, but once the deception is
discovered, trust, disappointment, and betrayal becomes the centerpiece of the
relationship instead of excitement, hopes, and dreams. If you want to try
Internet relationship building, be honest in your online proﬁle and be patient.
e right relationship is worth the wait.
HOW TO REDUCE YOUR CHANCES OF BEING HOOK ED BY A CATPHISH
e ﬂit of an eye, the turn of the head, or a slight change in voice pitch
provides clues to a person’s personality, sincerity, and veracity. As cited earlier
in the book, our brains constantly monitor verbal and non verbal cues to assess
others to see if they pose a potential threat. If the cues are friend signals, then
the brain tends to ignore the behaviors. If the cues are foe signals, the brain
initiates the ﬁght or ﬂight response and we go shields up to protect ourselves
against the threat or potential threat.
Nonverbal and verbal cues can undergo dramatic changes from second to
second and from one word to the next. Monitoring these changes can mean
the diﬀerence between relationship happiness and relationship hell. People are
comfortable using verbal and nonverbal cues to assess others and rely heavily
on this method to protect themselves against initiating or continuing bad
relationships.
Internet relationships lack the cues necessary for people to make similar
judgments. Emoticons help decode written communications, but they are not
enough. Decoding an unseen person’s personality, sincerity, and veracity
