potentially lifelong relationship. Building rapport becomes more important as
we evolve along the continuum from the “casual encounter” to the “signiﬁcant
other.” is is because the interaction becomes more intense and meaningful as
people who were once strangers become an increasingly integral part of each
other’s lives.
is chapter is designed to help you understand how and whether you are
eﬀectively building closeness with persons of interest.
BUILDING RAPPORT
People are communal beings. We naturally seek to connect to other people.
Rapport builds a psychological bridge between people and paves the way for
various levels of friendship to develop. If I can build rapport with you I can be
relatively certain you will like me. It’s that simple.
When I interviewed witnesses and suspects, my ﬁrst task was to build a
psychological connection between myself and the person I was interviewing.
People, especially suspects, rarely open up to people they don’t like. In the case
with suspects, I am asking that person to reveal secrets that would put him or
her in prison for a long time. On one occasion, I interviewed a repeat sexual
assault suspect. We connected on the topic of sports. Once the rapport bridge
was established, I was able to delve deeper into his personal life. Eventually, the
suspect confessed his crimes. e suspect voluntarily maintained his
connection with me long after his trial, conviction, and sentencing through a
series of unanswered letters he sent me. In the letters he thanked me for being
his friend and treating him with respect. Treating the suspect with respect is
possible; being his friend was an illusion; nonetheless, his letters provide a
testament of the power of connecting with other people.
TESTING FOR RAPPORT
Testing for rapport is important in any personal interaction because it lets us
know “how we are doing” and “where we stand” in developing a relationship
with any given individual. Even in a onetime encounter with someone,
particularly if we want something from them, testing for rapport is important
to determine when and if we have reached a point in the relationship where we
can attempt to achieve our relationship objectives. at being said, testing for
rapport reaches its most signiﬁcant level of importance when we are interested
in developing closer, more enduring relationships over time.
Sometimes there is an overlap between the behaviors we use to build
rapport and the behaviors we use to test for rapport. In these cases, the degree
and intensity of the behaviors vary as personal relationships strengthen or
weaken and provide us with an objective measure of a deepening or dying
relationship. For example, eye gaze is a way to build rapport. e length of that
gaze is used to test for rapport, providing a measure of how far the relationship
has developed or deteriorated. What follows are some of the important
behaviors that can be used to test for the foundation of friendships between
individuals.
TOUCHING
Touching represents a reliable gauge to measure the intensity of a relationship.
When strangers meet, they typically touch one another on the arms below the
shoulders or on the hands, as was discussed earlier in the book. Any touching
that occurs outside this public touch zone suggests a more intense relationship.
Women who feel comfortable with the person they are talking to will often
reach out and give the other person a light touch on the forearm or knee if
they are both seated. is light touch indicates that rapport has been
established.
Men often mistake a light touch to the forearm or knee as an invitation to
have sex. is is rarely the case. Men, more so than women, tend to interpret
nonverbal gestures signaling good rapport as a sexual oﬀer. When a woman
gives a man a light touch, the only safe assumption he can make is that she
likes him, and nothing more. is male tendency to assume a woman’s touch is
a sexual invitation often damages budding relationships, often beyond repair.
e most intimate (nonsexual) place a man can touch a woman in public is
the small of her back. is place is reserved for men who have earned the right
to make an intimate public display of aﬀection. Touching the small of a
woman’s back can also serve as a relationship indicator. If, for example, you see
