with the elements of the Friendship Formula. e Formula can also be used to
identify the parts of a relationship that need improvement. For example, a
couple who has been married for several years senses that their relationship is
deteriorating, but they don’t know how to ﬁx it. eir relationship can be self-
evaluated by looking at the interaction of each of the elements of the
Friendship Formula. e ﬁrst element to look at is proximity. Does the couple
share the same space or are they separately pursuing their own goals and rarely
sharing physical space together? e second element is frequency. Do they
frequently share time together? e third element is duration. How much time
do they spend together when they do see each other? e fourth element is
intensity, the glue that holds relationships together. e couple may have
proximity, frequency, and duration, but lack intensity. An example of this
combination is a couple who spends a lot of time at home watching television
together, but do not interact with any emotion. is relationship can be
improved if the couple increases the intensity of their relationship. ey could
go out on “date nights” to rekindle the feelings they felt for each other when
they ﬁrst met. ey could shut the television oﬀ for a few hours each night and
talk to each other, thus intensifying their relationship.
e combinations of the four elements of the Friendship Formula are
seemingly endless, depending on how couples interact with each another. In
many instances, one member in the relationship travels on business most of the
year. e lack of proximity can adversely aﬀect the relationship because it often
leads to reduced frequency, duration, and intensity. e lack of proximity can
be overcome with technology. Frequency, duration, and intensity can be
maintained with the help of email, chatting, texting, Skyping, and social
media.
Once you know the basic elements of all relationships, you will be able to
evaluate existing ones and nurture new ones by consciously regulating the four
relationship elements. To practice relationship self-evaluations, examine the
relationships you are in right now and see how the four basic elements are
playing a role in aﬀecting them. If you want to strengthen a relationship, think
of ways to regulate the Friendship Formula to achieve the desired outcome.
You can also extrica te yourself from unwanted relationships by slowly
decreasing each of the basic elements of the Friendship Formula. is gradual
decrease will let the unwanted person down incrementally without hurting
their feelings and without seeming like an abrupt break in the relationship. In
most cases, the unwanted person will naturally come to the conclusion that the
relationship is no longer viable and seek more rewarding interactions.
RECRUITING SPIES USING A SILENT PARTNER
Imagine you are a scientist, with a top-secret clearance, working as a contractor
for the Department of Defense. One day, seemingly out of nowhere, you
receive a telephone call from a government oﬃcial from the Chinese embassy.
He invites you to come to China to give a lecture on some of your unclassiﬁed
research. All your expenses will be paid by the Chinese government. You report
this invitation to your security oﬃcer, who tells you that you can give a lecture
in China as long as you don’t discuss classiﬁed information. You call to conﬁrm
your attendance and the Chinese oﬃcial invites you to come a week earlier so
you can do some sightseeing. You agree. You are very excited because this is a
once-in-a-lifetime opportunity.
You are met at the airport by a representative from the Chinese
government, who informs you that he will be your guide and translator for
your entire trip. Each morning the translator meets you at your hotel and has
breakfast with you. You spend all day sightseeing. e translator buys all your
meals and arranges some evening social activities. e translator is friendly and
shares information about his family and social activities . You reciprocate by
sharing information about your family, nothing important, just the names of
your wife and children, their birthdays, your wedding anniversary, and the
holidays you and your family celebrate. As the days go by, you are amazed that
you and your translator have so much in common despite stark cultural
diﬀerences.
e day of the lecture arrives. e lecture hall is ﬁlled to capacity. Your
lecture is well received. At the end of the lecture, one of the participants
approaches you and says he is very interested in your research. He comments
that your research is fascinating and innovative. He poses a question relating to
the work he has been doing that relates to your research. e answer requires
you to reveal sensitive but not classiﬁed information. You gladly provide the
