people are thinking. However, a lip purse is not a foe signal; someone can be
happy with you and still use it.
Again, remember why watching for and observing lip purses is so critical:
Once a person is able to articulate a “No” response to your idea or suggestion,
or voice a negative remark, the principle of “consistency” comes into play,
meaning now it is very hard for the listener to go back on their verbal response
and change their mind. e lip purse allows you to see a negative response
coming and gives you a chance to counter it before it is spoken, giving you a
better chance of getting your idea or project accepted.
You can use this nonverbal signal to help you increase your verbal
eﬀectiveness at home and at work. As an example, consider this statement you
might make to your wife:
“Honey, I can show you how we can aﬀord a bass boat [or substitute with
any item you may wish to purchase] so I can go ﬁshing.”
Now, as you begin to present your ﬁnancial argument you can see your
wife’s lips purse. She has formed a sentence in her mind, which is in opposition
to what you are saying. (Her lip purse is telling you she doesn’t want you to get
into her purse!) You know now that you have to come up with an additional
justiﬁcation before she articulates her objection; otherwise her public
proclamation will make it more diﬃcult for you to end up with a boat or any
other big-ticket item you wish to purchase. Ladies, this technique also applies
to men.
WHEN THE BOSS GIVES YOU A LIP (PURS E)
At work, I was always trying to get money or manpower support for some
operation I wanted to run. Both were in short supply and I had to compete for
resources. I remember once explaining to my boss why I needed money for this
particular project and I saw him purse his lips. Now I knew he thought up a
statement in opposition to what I was saying and I needed to change his mind
before he had a chance to say no. If he publicly rejected my proposal, getting
his approval would be next to impossible.
In an attempt to forestall a verbal rejection, I used an empathic statement.
“Boss, I’ll bet you’re thinking that this idea isn’t going to work, but let me
explain why it will.” I knew exactly what point the boss had issues with,
because his lips pursed when I made a speciﬁc statement. Now I knew what
was troubling him and my statement bought me some time to respond to his
concern and convince him my idea was worthy before he made any verbal
declaration, which is hard to reverse once it is publicly stated.
e next time you present a project or proposition to your supervisor,
watch for the lip purse display. If your supervisor purses his or her lips during
your presentation, you know that he or she has already formed a thought in
opposition to your proposal. Once you see a lip purse, you should attempt to
change your supervisor’s mind before he or she vocalizes opposition. Be ready
with an empathic statement. Try: “So, you don’t think what I am saying makes
much sense. Let me go over a few things that will show you that what I am
proposing is the best course of action.” You acknowledge your supervisor’s
doubts and present counterarguments to change his or her mind before the
negative thought is voiced.
Lip Bite
LIP BITE
