How you say something can sometimes be as important as the message itself.
Of particular concern is your tone of voice, which transmits information to the
listener irrespective of what is being said. Attraction and interest, for example,
are communicated much more by the tone of voice than by the words being
spoken.
HOW YOU SPEAK INFLUENCES HOW OTHERS PERCEIVE YOUR
MESSAGE . . . AND YOU
Tone of voice can convey messages that words alone can’t. A deep, low-pitched
voice conveys romantic interest. A high-pitched voice conveys surprise or
skepticism. A loud voice will give the impression that you are overbearing. e
tone of voice you use can embrace others or dismiss them out of hand.
e speed of your voice also regulates conversations. Fast talking adds a
sense of urgency to the conversation or can act as a prompt to end a boring
exchange. Dragging out a word can signal interest. Actors in movies often drag
out the greeting “Hello” to signal romantic interest. Conversely, a slow, soft-
spoken monotone voice signals lack of interest in the listener or extreme
shyness in the speaker. Conversely, a slow, soft-spoken voice with normal
inﬂections conveys empathy. I often hear this type of communication at
funerals or during tragedies.
Most parents learn to control their kids’ behavior with tonal inﬂections. I
often spoke to my kids in a deep, slow voice to express my displeasure. As with
many parents, if I was extremely displeased, I would drag out my kid’s ﬁrst,
middle, and last name with great eﬀect. A short, clipped “Good” expresses
approval.
Tone of voice delivers the emotional part of your message. I have a Chicago
accent and I tend to clip my words. When I’m in Chicago, word clipping goes
unnoticed because everybody clips their words. However, when I travel to
other parts of the country, people perceive word clipping as being overbearing
and dismissive. Sarcasm can also be misinterpreted without the accompanying
tone of voice that lets the listener know that there is a hidden meaning to the
message. is is the reason why sarcasm should be avoided in emails and text
messages.
Voice intonation also plays a large part in conversational turn-taking.
Lowering your voice at the end of a sentence signals that you are ﬁnished
talking and it is now the other person’s turn to talk. If the speaker lowers their
voice at the end of a sentence and continues to talk, the listener will become
frustrated because they think it’s their turn to talk. Dominating a conversation
violates the Golden Rule of Friendship by keeping the focus of attention on
yourself instead of on the other person.
Conversely, taking your turn to speak when your person of interest has not
given any vocal “turn-yielding cues,” even if he or she has ﬁnished a sentence,
can impede friendship development. Violating conversation etiquette can cause
irritation and have a detrimental eﬀect on friendship development.
Make it a habit to pause for a nanosecond or two before speaking, especially
if you are an extrovert. is pause gives introverts a chance to gather their
thoughts. Remember, introverts tend to think before they speak. If you
interrupt their thought process, they tend to become frustrated and,
consequently, like you less. e pause gives extroverts time to think about what
they are about to say. is habit saved me from countless embarrassing
moments.
WHAT YOU SAY INFLUENCES HOW OTHERS PERCEIVE YOUR MESSAGE . . .
AND YOU
is seems like common sense and, to a degree, it is. But the focus here is on
saying certain things or saying them in a certain way that you might not
otherwise use to make and keep friends. Here are some verbal strategies you
can use to make or keep friends in everyday situations, strategies you might
otherwise ignore or downplay, to the detriment of your relationships.
Strategy #1: When you are right and someone else is wrong, give that
individual a face-saving way to carry out your wishes with a minimum of
embarrassment and/or humiliation. e person will like you a lot more for
your eﬀorts on their behalf.
Human beings have an inherent need to be right, but being right comes
with some unintended consequences. One of those is the loss of friendship if
