4
THE LAWS OF ATTRACTION
If you go looking for a friend, you’re going to ﬁnd they’re very scarce. If you go out to be a
friend, you’ll ﬁnd them everywhere.
—ZIG ZIGLAR
In this chapter I will give you some additional tools for your friendship
toolbox: the “Laws of Attraction.” ese “laws” describe certain factors that,
when present, serve to heighten the probability that two individuals will be
drawn to each other and experience a positive outcome when they interact.
Because these laws play a critica l role in shaping human relationships, if you
can incorporate them into your own relationship interactions they will provide
additional ways for you to make friends with the people you meet.
ink of each Law of Attraction as a tool to enhance your relationship
eﬀectiveness. You don’t have to use them all to achieve your friendship
objectives; in fact, you shouldn’t, because some of the laws are not congruent
with your personal characteristics or are designed to work with long- versus
short-term relationships (a onetime encounter with a sales clerk as opposed to
the development of a lasting friendship). Pick the ones that suit you the best
and go with those when interacting with persons of interest.
THE LAW OF SIMILARITY (“COMMON GROUND” )
People who share the same perspectives, attitudes, and activities tend to
develop close relationships. e adage “Birds of a feather ﬂock together” has
merit. People are attracted to other people who share their interests. e need
to avoid cognitive dissonance may explain why this is true. Dissonance occurs
when people hold two opposing ideas or beliefs. is real or perceived
diﬀerence creates anxiety.
People holding similar views reinforce one another and thereby enhance the
likelihood of mutual attraction. Similarity also increases the probability that
like-minded individuals will meet again. Mutual reinforcement maintains or
elevates self-esteem, which leads to a greater sense of well-being and happiness.
People who share the same principles and beliefs rarely experience
dissonance and feel secure in the sameness they share with each other. ese
individuals tend to experience less conﬂict because they perceive the world in
similar ways. Sameness leads to the perception of greater happiness and a
feeling of being understood. When people ﬁrst meet, even the perception of
sameness will increase mutual attraction.
CUT FROM THE SAME CLOTH
Early in my career, I noticed that most FBI agents looked alike and shared the
same views. is can be explained by the psychological principle of similarity
and attraction. FBI agents sitting on hiring boards tended to hire new agents
who were most like themselves. When the newly hired agents gained enough
seniority to participate in the hiring process, they also unconsciously selected
individuals who were most like them. Over the decades, the FBI became
populated by agents who shared the same views, dressed alike, and looked
alike.
With the advent of aﬃrmative action, more women and minorities were
included in the FBI ranks. When these individuals gained seniority and sat on
hiring boards, they tended to select applicants who were most like themselves.
Based on the psychological principle of similarity and attraction, current FBI
agents as well as most U.S. businesses more closely reﬂect the diversity of the
American population today.
Commonalities connect people. Finding common ground quickly
establishes rapport and a fertile environment for developing friendships.
Aristotle wrote, “We like those who resemble us, and are engaged in the same
pursuits. . . . We like those who desire the same things as we [do].” Developing
relationships is easy if you can ﬁnd common ground with another person.
