As you’ll recall from the beginning of the chapter, ﬁreﬂies can light up as a
friend signal to attract members of the opposite sex or as a foe signal to stave
oﬀ would-be predators. e same is true with each of us. We have the capacity
to transmit friend or foe signals to those around us. Obviously, in a book about
making friends, one would hope that your focus would be on sending out
friend signals and avoiding nonverbal cues that encourage others to perceive
you as a foe. e problem is (as the student with the “urban scowl” discovered)
we are not always aware we are sending out foe signals, oftentimes because we
don’t realize what they are. When the goal is to make people you do not know
view you favorably, whether it be for a onetime interaction or a lasting
friendship, you want to use “ﬁreﬂy” tactics (nonverbal signals) to make your
intentions known and predispose the targeted individual to like you. us, foe
signals are nonverbal signals you don’t want to send or see when you attempt
interactions with strangers.
If you are having trouble making friends you might want to study your
gestures and facial expressions to see if you are the unwitting transmitter of any
or all of the following nonverbal behaviors.
THE ELONGATED GAZE (STARE)
Eye contact, in concert with other friend signals, can have a positive impact on
both parties involved as long as the gaze doesn’t last longer than a second. As
pointed out earlier, gazing that continues beyond a second is often perceived as
aggression, which turns the nonverbal communication into a foe signal. e
human brain perceives such behavior as predatory in nature and sends a
“shields up” warning to the person at the receiving end of the eye contact.
ELEVATOR EYES
Elevator eyes consist of a sweeping head-to-toe gaze. As a nonverbal gesture, it
is highly oﬀensive in ﬂedgling relationships. is form of eye gaze is perceived
as intrusive because the person doing the looking has not yet earned the right
to invade personal space, which can be violated psychologically as well as
physically. Invading personal space with your eyes can be perceived as being
oﬀensive, sometimes even more oﬀensive than the physical invasion of
personal space. In some cases, the behavior can also be viewed as threatening
and/or aggressive, causing a defensive response from the person being looked
at. In contrast, a head-to-toe gaze will be accepted or even be seen as
complimentary in a close, established relationship.
THE BOYFRIEND BODY SCAN
Long before the tolerated but unpleasant full body scans became a necessity at
airports around the world, they were being done by individuals using “elevator
eyes” to size up persons of interest. I routinely used the full body scan when
my daughter’s boyfriends would appear at the front door. I would open the
door, stare deeply into the suitor’s eyes, and very slowly scan his body from
head to toe. I would ﬁnish my introduction with a stern, “What do you want?”
e young man would stammer and stutter to ﬁnd words to say. I knew then
that my message was received loud and clear. at nonverbal message was
more eﬀective than any verbal threats I could have issued.
UNCOVERED
During my post-FBI career, I trained undercover police oﬃcers in how to
behave during operations to avoid being identiﬁed. Eye gaze is one of the
nonverbal cues that exposes undercover oﬃcers. As stated earlier, people have
to earn the right to enter your personal space physically or with their eyes.
Police oﬃcers, by virtue of their authority, have the right to look into places
and at people in a way normal people can’t. Have you ever been stopped in
traﬃc at a red light next to a police car? You take sneak peeks into the oﬃcer’s
car. If the oﬃcer happens to turn and meet your gaze, you quickly break eye
contact and look forward again. e opposite is not true. If the police oﬃcer
looks into your car and you meet his gaze, he does not break eye contact, he
just continues to look. You would likely be the one who quickly breaks eye
contact and hope he doesn’t ﬁnd a reason to stop you. e police oﬃcer has
the right to look at you and into your car by virtue of his authority; you can’t
do the same thing without risking social repercussions.
