BUILDING BARRIERS WITH INANIMATE OBJECTS
e placement of soft drink cans, pillows, purses, and other movable objects
between you and another person signals discomfort and a lack of rapport. A
woman who does not have good rapport with the person she is talking with
will often use her purse to create a barrier. is usually involves picking up her
purse from the ﬂoor and bringing it to her lap. is signals that rapport has
not yet been established or that the rapport is deteriorating.
PILLOW TALK
I explained the function of barriers to a new agent I was training. He was a
little skeptical about the eﬀectiveness of the technique until he interviewed a
particular witness. We interviewed the witness at her home. She sat on the
couch and we sat in two wing-backed chairs across from her. e new agent
asked the witness to provide a description of the suspect. e witness hesitated,
reached for a couch pillow, and placed it on her lap. e new agent gave me a
sideward glance to let me know that he had picked up on the nonverbal tell
that the witness was uncomfortable describing the suspect. e new agent
constructed an empathic statement. “Ma’am, you seem to be uncomfortable
about identifying the suspect.” “I sure am,” she admitted. “I don’t want that
guy coming back and hurting me.” e agent constructed a follow-up
empathic statement: “So, you’re worried about retribution.” “Yeah,” she sighed.
A change in the witness’s nonverbal language signaled a change in her
psychological disposition. Watching for subtle changes in people’s nonverbal
language often communicates more information than anything the person
might say.
e agent took the time to discuss the woman’s fear and gave her reasons
that her fear was unfounded. Once he was able to eliminate the witness’s fear
of retaliation, not surprisingly, she returned the couch pillow to the corner of
the couch. e connection between the new agent and the witness had been
reestablished.
PROLONGED EYE CLOSURE
Anxious people will signify their uneasiness by prolonged eye closure. eir
eyelids serve as a barrier to prevent them from seeing the person or thing that
makes them anxious or uncomfortable. On several occasions when I entered
my boss’s oﬃce I saw him close his eyelids for one to two seconds. is display
let me know that he was busy and did not want to talk to me at that time. My
boss and I generally shared good rapport, but on those days when he displayed
prolonged eye closure, I quickly excused myself. My boss would not welcome
my requests, comments, or suggestions when his nonverbal behavior indicated
he wanted to be left alone.
EYE-BLINK RATE
When people experience anxiety, they tend to increase their eye-blink rate. e
normal rate for most people is ﬁfteen blinks per minute. As people become
more anxious, their rate increases or decreases from their normal baseline rate.
Each person has a slightly diﬀerent “normal” eye blink rate and thus their
personal rate must be calibrated at the beginning of your interaction with
them.
CUP POSITIONING
As you may recall, 70 percent of all information is transferred between
individuals over food and drink. People who eat or drink together are
predisposed to talk. Watching where a person places his or her cup can signal if
rapport has been established. If the person across from you places his or her
cup between the two of you, the cup forms a barrier, which signals that rapport
has not yet been established. If the person places it to either side, leaving open
the space between the two of you, this signals that rapport has been
established. e three pictures that follow show a couple developing good
rapport.
