go myself and hold these obligations over her head. at same day the
money-lender paid the lady a call. He paid her a good many other calls,
harassing her, threatening legal action and driving her until she was
almost to a state of nervous collapse. Well-placed sympathies soon made
her talk and she burst out pettishly that she was in debt and that most of
her acquaintances were in debt—nothing unusual in that set.
is was an opportune chance to be of material beneﬁt to the lady.
Seriously, we talked over her aﬀairs. I found them pretty well entangled.
We discussed the young Grand Duke. I gradually persuaded her that
there was no hope of a legitimate marriage with the house of
Mecklenburg-Schwerein, but because of her association with the young
Grand Duke and the fact that she had been betrothed to him, it was only
right that the Duchy provide her with some means of assistance. e ice
was perilously thin, for the lady is a high-spirited woman of ideals and I
had to be careful to word my language so that it would not appear as
though she were blackmailing. In justice to her, I believe that if she had
taken that view of it she would have dropped the entire matter and retired
from society for the season rather than go through with my plan. Finally,
I said, “Have you any means by which you could compel the ducal house
to make adequate acknowledgments and redresses to you?”
After a long hesitation, she jumped up, swept from the room, and
returned presently with a handful of letters. I saw on some of them the
Grand Duke’s coat of arms. e young fool had been careless enough for
that! She shook the letters in a temper and cried, “I wonder what Franz’s
uncle would say to these? Why I could compel him to marry me.”
Here was the chance. e iron—in this case my lady’s  temper—was
hot. I suggested that we sit down and talk it over. As an introductory
attack, to create the impression that I knew what I was talking about, I
hinted that I was connected with a leading family in Germany and that I
was in London incog. I approached the situation from the viewpoint that
I was her friend, not a friend of the house of Mecklenburg-Schwerein, bu t
that, by knowing them and their ways, I could be of great assistance to
her.
“It is regrettable,” I consoled; “but you have no chance for a legitimate,
even a morganatic alliance with the young Grand Duke. I consider their
entire attitude toward you utterly unfair. In view of your understanding
with him, you are most certainly entitled to adequate recompense from
his house. If you went into court you could obtain this on grounds of
breach of promise, but I can understand your feelings. Such a step would
only cast odium upon an old and noble family such as yours.”
at seemed to her liking.
“But what can I do?” she said.
“In view of my friendship for you,” I told her, “I would consider it an
honor if you would permit me to act on your behalf. I think I can
negotiate with the young Grand Duke’s uncle and I promise that he will
regard the matter in a fair light. I appreciate the extreme delicacy of the
situation and you must observe the necessity of a man handling this
aﬀair.”
She shook her head and tapped the letters nervously.
“No. It is intolerable,” she said. “Not to be thought of.”
I saw that I had to make it stronger. I thereupon invented the most
ingenious lie it has ever been given me to tell. In about ﬁve minutes I had
painted the young Grand Duke in such colors that the adventures of Don
Juan were saintly compared to the escapades of his ducal highness.
“Why consider it yourself,” I said. “He was to be over here with you
during the season. He has not come. You told me yourself that he has not
even answered your letters. Well that’s all there is to it. Your ladyship, he
and his house deserve any punishment that you can visit upon them.”
e idea of punishment appealed where the other had failed. e
outraged pride of a woman, especially an Englishwoman, is a terrible
thing. Soon after that I made haste to take my leave. At my quarters I
wrote two letters to myself and signed the Grand Duke’s name to them.
In these I oﬀered to pay her ladyship’s debts. ey were addressed to me
and after allowing a reasonable time to elapse, I again went out to Mayfair
and read them to her. She was now cold and hard and gave me full
permission to go ahead and make any arrangements I deemed advisable. I
thereupon went to the Grand Duke’s bank in London and notiﬁed them
