Truth bias creates the primacy eﬀect. e primacy eﬀect, as you will recall from
Chapter 3, creates a ﬁlter through which we view communication and events.
e primacy eﬀect does not change reality but alters people’s perception of it.
Truth bias creates a primacy ﬁlter. Anything a person writes tends to be
evaluated as truthful unless there is something to cause you to doubt what is
written. Absent verbal and nonverbal cues, individuals are at a disadvantage
when judging written correspondence on the Internet.
COMPETING HYPOTHESES
Developing competing hypotheses prevents the truth bias and the primacy
eﬀect from unduly undermining your ability to judge the character and
veracity of the person who is writing to you. Hypotheses are nothing more
than educated guesses. A competing hypothesis is an educated guess that
supposes a diﬀerent outcome based on the same or similar set of circumstances.
For example, say one hypothesis posits that the person who is writing to
you is genuine and telling the truth. A competing hypothesis posits that the
person who is writing to you is an imposter and a liar. During the course of
your written exchanges with another person on the Internet (for example, in
an instant message session) you should seek evidence to support your initial
hypothesis (the writer is genuine and truthful) or your competing hypothesis
(the writer is an imposter and a liar).
Rarely does all the evidence support the initial hypothesis or the competing
hypothesis, because honest people often say and do things that make them
look dishonest and, conversely, dishonest people often say and do things that
make them look honest. In the end, however, the weight of the evidence
should support one hypothesis over the other. Countering the eﬀects of truth
bias and the primacy eﬀect reduces your vulnerability to being deceived on the
Internet . . .  catphished, so to say.
LAWS OF ATTRACTION
As discussed in Chapter 4, attractive people receive preferential treatment and
garner more attention than do unattractive (or less attractive) individuals. e
eﬀect of physical beauty is reduced in Internet communications, unless a
picture accompanies an Internet proﬁle. Keep in mind that people often lie in
their Internet proﬁles to enhance their ability to attract partners. Since people
do not have face-to-face interaction with the person writing to them, they have
no point of reference against which to judge their written communication.
Contrast plays an important role in attraction. When two people stand side
by side, people tend to contrast one against the other. In the absence of a
second person for comparison purposes, an individual will tend to compare the
single person against their “idealized” person. Since the person writing to you
on the Internet is singular, you will have a tendency to compare that person
against your idealized person. Over time, people tend to attribute the
characteristic of their idealized person to the person writing them. is
misattribution leads to the increased probability of being the victim of a
catphish.
RAPPORT BUILDING
Building rapport on the Internet relies solely on written text, assuming no use
of Skype or other photographic transmission. is limits the techniques people
normally have available to establish rapport in face-to-face communications.
As mentioned earlier in the book, ﬁnding common ground is a powerful
technique to establish rapport. In order to ﬁnd common ground on the
Internet, you must disclose personal information to the person to whom you
are writing. Disclosing this kind of information is another powerful technique
to develop rapport. Since Internet communications are anonymous, people
tend to disclose more information, and do it more quickly, than they would
face-to-face. One reason for this is that the sender does not have verbal and
nonverbal cues to gain feedback about the acceptance or rejection of his or her
information by the receiver of the written information.
When people receive rejection cues in face-to-face communications, they
tend to stop disclosing. is is not the case online. In fact, people tend to
increase the disclosure of sensitive personal information. e result of an
increase in self-disclosure propels the relationship to a higher level than if the
relationship were a face-to-face encounter. As a result, a vital step in the
