customers to give higher tips. Interestingly, attractiveness has no effect on tip amounts for male servers from
either male or female customers.
Now, let’s tackle the eight-hundred-pound gorilla in the room. Yes, research shows that more attractive
female servers get higher tips than less attractive servers do, regardless of the level of service. Servers with
larger breasts get higher tips. Servers with blond hair get higher tips. Tips increase as a server’s body size
decreases. Servers who wear makeup receive higher tips from male customers but not from female customers.
That is just the way it is. Enough said.
Tip 3: Introduce Yourself by Name (Male and Female Servers)
When servers introduce themselves by name, they receive higher tips. Personal introductions make the servers
appear friendlier. Customers tip servers who appear friendly and likable. Servers who introduced themselves by
name received an average tip of two dollars more than servers who did not. Mundanely providing customers
your name is not sufﬁcient. Your introduction should be accompanied by a wide smile as it makes you appear
friendlier and more personable and thus predisposes customers to leave higher tips.
Tip 4: Create Reciprocity (Male and Female Servers)
When people receive something from somebody, they are predisposed to reciprocate. Customers who receive
something, even small items, will typically reciprocate by leaving a larger tip. Servers can induce reciprocity
through several techniques; even just writing “Thank you” on the back of the check will produce higher tips.
Reciprocity can also be induced in a more subtle fashion. Just prior to the time when the customers’ orders
are complete, tell one of the customers that the manner in which the food was prepared was not up to your
standards and that you sent the meal back to the chef to have it cooked correctly. Then apologize for the delay
and, after a few minutes, serve the food as it was originally prepared. The customers perceive that you have
done them a favor, although no favor was actually performed, thus predisposing the customers to reciprocate
by means of a higher gratuity. Caution should be used when using this technique. You should select
imperfections that do not question the taste or quality of the food or discredit the restaurant. Reciprocity can
also be induced by bringing mints along with the check.
Tip 5: Repeat the Customer’s Order (Male and Female Servers)
People like people who are like them. When you repeat orders, customers subconsciously feel that you are more
like them than not. People who are in good rapport mirror each other’s gestures and speech. By repeating the
customers’ orders, they experience sameness with you, like you more, and tend to leave bigger tips.
Tip 6: Provide Good Service (Male and Female Servers)
At the heart of a good tip is good service. Greet customers with a warm, friendly smile, introduce yourself by
name, repeat the customers’ order, reﬁll drink glasses without being asked, and periodically check in on the
customers to see if they need anything. Each customer is different and you should learn to speed-read them.
Some customers want to be pampered, some customers require minimal service, and some customers just want
to be left alone to enjoy their meal. The quicker you learn to read your customers, the higher your tips will be.
Tip 7: Apply the Golden Rule of Friendship
The Golden Rule of Friendship (see Chapter 3) applies to everyone: “Make the customers feel good about
themselves and they will like you.” The more customers like their servers, the higher the tips they are likely to
leave.
FOE SIGNALS
As you’ll recall from the beginning of the chapter, ﬁreﬂies can light up as a
friend signal to attract members of the opposite sex or as a foe signal to stave
oﬀ would-be predators. e same is true with each of us. We have the capacity
to transmit friend or foe signals to those around us. Obviously, in a book about
making friends, one would hope that your focus would be on sending out
friend signals and avoiding nonverbal cues that encourage others to perceive
you as a foe. e problem is (as the student with the “urban scowl” discovered)
we are not always aware we are sending out foe signals, oftentimes because we
don’t realize what they are. When the goal is to make people you do not know
view you favorably, whether it be for a onetime interaction or a lasting
friendship, you want to use “ﬁreﬂy” tactics (nonverbal signals) to make your
intentions known and predispose the targeted individual to like you. us, foe
signals are nonverbal signals you don’t want to send or see when you attempt
interactions with strangers.
If you are having trouble making friends you might want to study your
gestures and facial expressions to see if you are the unwitting transmitter of any
or all of the following nonverbal behaviors.
THE ELONGATED GAZE (STARE)
Eye contact, in concert with other friend signals, can have a positive impact on
both parties involved as long as the gaze doesn’t last longer than a second. As
pointed out earlier, gazing that continues beyond a second is often perceived as
aggression, which turns the nonverbal communication into a foe signal. e
human brain perceives such behavior as predatory in nature and sends a
“shields up” warning to the person at the receiving end of the eye contact.
ELEVATOR EYES
Elevator eyes consist of a sweeping head-to-toe gaze. As a nonverbal gesture, it
is highly oﬀensive in ﬂedgling relationships. is form of eye gaze is perceived
as intrusive because the person doing the looking has not yet earned the right
to invade personal space, which can be violated psychologically as well as
physically. Invading personal space with your eyes can be perceived as being
