POSTURAL POSITIONING
A good way to test for rapport is to note the posture of the two individuals
who are interacting. Two behaviors are of particular value.
INWARD LEANING
Individuals lean toward people or things they like and distance themselves
from those they don’t. People who are in good rapport lean toward one
another. During predeployment training for interrogators going to Iraq, I
noticed that the majority of the soldiers were leaning backward during the ﬁrst
hour of my presentation. Just prior to the break, using an empathic statement,
I told them I didn’t feel as though I was making a connection with them. e
soldiers nodded in unison. ey told me they had been to Iraq on two
previous deployments and the material I was teaching them was too basic. I
told them to take a ﬁfteen-minute break and I would go to my oﬃce to
retrieve the advanced training manual. Had I not noticed the lack of rapport
between myself and the class during the ﬁrst hour, the entire training session
would have been wasted.
OPEN POSTURE
People who are in good rapport assume an open body posture. An open
posture signals attraction and openness to communication. It consists of
gestures that include uncrossed legs and arms, a high rate of hand movements
during speech, palms-up displays, a slight forward lean, and the display of
friend signals. is communicates warmth, trust, and friendliness. To add to
the impact of open posture, one can use head nodding, head tilts, and verbal
encouragers such as “I see,” “Uh-huh,” or “Go on.”
A person experiencing good rapport does not feel threatened by the person
with whom they are interacting and therefore is comfortable assuming an open
posture. An individual who feels threatened in the same situation tends to
assume a closed body posture to protect himself from a threat or perceived
threat. A closed posture can also indicate a lack of interest.
Closed posture displays are typically the opposite of open posture displays.
ese include tightly crossed arms, a low rate of hand movements, and few
friend signals. If the person you are talking with is looking at you but their
torso and feet are pointing in another direction, he or she is not fully engaged.
A person’s feet will often point in another direction to subconsciously telegraph
a desire to leave. Other signs of disinterest are backward leaning of the body or
head, supporting the head with the hands, or negative grooming behaviors
such as picking at teeth or nails.
TORSO REPOSITIONING
People who share rapport will orient themselves toward each other. Leaning in
or away from someone is one form of torso shift indicating good or poor
rapport. Another type of torso shift is illustrated in the two photographs on
the following page. is type of nonverbal body movement involves shifting
the torso so it faces the person of interest more directly. Such a body shift is a
good indication of increasing rapport between the individuals involved.
In testing for rapport using torso movements, the basic rule to remember is
that people who share rapport will orient their bodies toward each other. is
is the typical sequence for achieving such an orientation: First, the other
person’s head will turn toward you. Second, the other person’s shoulders will
turn toward you. Finally, the other person will reposition his or her torso so
that it directly faces you. When this occurs, you can be conﬁdent that rapport
has been established.
