purchase a product or service.
SALESPERSON: Can I help you?
CUSTOMER: No, I’m just looking.
SALESPERSON: So, you haven’t decided which model you want to buy. (empathic statement)
CUSTOMER: I need a new car, but I’m not sure I can aﬀord one.
SALESPERSON: So you’d buy a car, if it were priced right? (empathic conditional)
CUSTOMER: Sure.
SALESPERSON: Do you like red or blue cars?
CUSTOMER: Blue.
SALESPERSON: Let’s take a look at some blue cars in your price range.
In response to the empathic elicitation, the customer identiﬁed the reason
preventing him from buying a car. e salesperson then used the empathic
conditional approach. e empathic conditional keeps the focus on the
customer and, at the same time, sets up the if/then conditional “So you’d buy a
car, if it were priced right?” e underlying presumption is that the customer is
going to buy a car if certain conditions are met. In this case, the condition is
price. e empathic conditional helped the salesperson to identify a buying
objective. With this new information, the salesperson can direct the customer
to lines of cars within his price range.
THE NEED TO RECIPROCATE USING THE PRINCIPLE OF QUID PRO QUO
When people receive something either physically or emotionally, they feel the
need to reciprocate by giving back something of equal or greater value (Law of
Reciprocity). Quid pro quo is an elicitation technique that encourages people
to match information provided by others. For example, you meet a person for
the ﬁrst time and want to know where they work. Instead of directly asking
them, “Where do you work?” tell them where you work ﬁrst. People will tend
to reciprocate by telling you where they work. is elicitation technique can be
used to discover information about people without being intrusive and
appearing nosy.
If you don’t want people to know where you work but are still curious
about where they are employed, you can get the needed information from the
other person and short-circuit reciprocity by asking the question in a novel
way. Say, “Where do you labor?” is question requires additional cognitive
processing, which disrupts the need to reciprocate with the question, “Where
do you work?”
I used the need to reciprocate when I interviewed suspects. I would always
oﬀer the suspect something to drink such as coﬀee, tea, water, or soda at the
beginning of the interview (the television term is interrogation). I did this to
invoke the need to reciprocate. In return for the drink, I hope to receive
something in return such as intelligence information or a confession.
During your conversation, you should seek common ground (Law of
Similarity) with the other person. You should also use empathic statements to
keep the focus on that individual. In short, you want to make the other person
feel good about themselves (Golden Rule of Friendship), and if you are
successful, they will like you and seek future opportunities to share your
company.
USING A THIRD-PARTY APPROACH TO DISCOVER THE WAY PEOPLE
REALLY FEEL
In general, people are reluctant to talk about themselves and how they really
feel about someone or something. However, people are less hesitant to talk
about others, perhaps to avoid revealing too much information about
themselves. You can use this human characteristic to learn some very closely
held (intimate) information about a person of interest. is is achieved by
using the elicitation technique known as internal/external foci.
Here’s an example of how the technique works. Most couples in a
monogamous relationship would like to know if their partner is predisposed to
cheat on them. If you ask your signiﬁcant other if they would, in fact, cheat on
you, rarely will you hear, “Yeah, I don’t have any problem with that.” ey may
be thinking that, but would surely not say it out loud.
To ﬁnd out what your loved one really thinks about cheating, you need to
approach the topic from a third-person perspective. Instead of asking the direct
question, “What do you think about cheating?” you want to say, “My friend
Susan caught her husband cheating. What do you think about that?” When a
person is confronted with a third-party observation, they tend to look inside
themselves to ﬁnd the answer and tell you what they really think.
