making a move?” In fact, the second thing Seagull said to Charles when he
ﬁnally introduced himself at the grocery store was “What took you so long?”
FREQUENCY AND DURATION
Duration has a unique quality in that the more time you spend with a person,
the more inﬂuence they have over your thoughts and actions. Mentors who
spend a lot of time with their mentees exercise a positive inﬂuence over them.
People who have less than honorable intentions can negatively inﬂuence the
people they spend time with. e best example of the power of duration is
between parents and their children. e more time parents spend with their
children, the more likely the parents will be able to inﬂuence them. If parental
duration is lacking, the children tend to spend more time with their friends,
including, in extreme cases, gang members. ese people now have a greater
inﬂuence on children because they spend most of their time with them.
Duration shares an inverse relationship with frequency. If you see a friend
frequently, then the duration of the encounter will be shorter. Conversely, if
you don’t see your friend very often, the duration of your visit will typically
increase signiﬁcantly. For example, if you see a friend every day, the duration of
your visits can be low because you can keep up with what’s going on as events
unfold. If, however, you only see your friend twice a year, the duration of your
visits will be greater. ink back to a time when you had dinner in a restaurant
with a friend you hadn’t seen for a long period of time. You probably spent
several hours catching up on each other’s lives. e duration of the same
dinner would be considerably shorter if you saw the person on a regular basis.
Conversely, in romantic relationships the frequency and duration are very high
because couples, especially newly minted ones, want to spend as much time
with each other as possible. e intensity of the relationship will also be very
high.
RELATIONSHIP SELF-EVALUATION
ink back to the beginning of your current relationship or a relationship you
had in the past; you should now be able to see that it developed in accordance
with the elements of the Friendship Formula. e Formula can also be used to
identify the parts of a relationship that need improvement. For example, a
couple who has been married for several years senses that their relationship is
deteriorating, but they don’t know how to ﬁx it. eir relationship can be self-
evaluated by looking at the interaction of each of the elements of the
Friendship Formula. e ﬁrst element to look at is proximity. Does the couple
share the same space or are they separately pursuing their own goals and rarely
sharing physical space together? e second element is frequency. Do they
frequently share time together? e third element is duration. How much time
do they spend together when they do see each other? e fourth element is
intensity, the glue that holds relationships together. e couple may have
proximity, frequency, and duration, but lack intensity. An example of this
combination is a couple who spends a lot of time at home watching television
together, but do not interact with any emotion. is relationship can be
improved if the couple increases the intensity of their relationship. ey could
go out on “date nights” to rekindle the feelings they felt for each other when
they ﬁrst met. ey could shut the television oﬀ for a few hours each night and
talk to each other, thus intensifying their relationship.
e combinations of the four elements of the Friendship Formula are
seemingly endless, depending on how couples interact with each another. In
many instances, one member in the relationship travels on business most of the
year. e lack of proximity can adversely aﬀect the relationship because it often
leads to reduced frequency, duration, and intensity. e lack of proximity can
be overcome with technology. Frequency, duration, and intensity can be
maintained with the help of email, chatting, texting, Skyping, and social
media.
Once you know the basic elements of all relationships, you will be able to
evaluate existing ones and nurture new ones by consciously regulating the four
relationship elements. To practice relationship self-evaluations, examine the
relationships you are in right now and see how the four basic elements are
playing a role in aﬀecting them. If you want to strengthen a relationship, think
of ways to regulate the Friendship Formula to achieve the desired outcome.
You can also extrica te yourself from unwanted relationships by slowly
decreasing each of the basic elements of the Friendship Formula. is gradual
