CUSTOMS OFFICER: Give me the dirt and you will be able to begin your visit to the United
States.
VISITOR: No, my dirt isn’t contaminated. I have to keep it.
CUSTOMS OFFICER: You are pretty passionate about keeping your dirt. (empathic statement)
VISITOR: I want my dirt! Can I, at least, keep a teaspoonful? (movement toward voluntary
compliance)
CUSTOMS OFFICER: You are trying to ﬁgure out a way to get at least some of your dirt into
the country. (empathic statement)
VISITOR: Yes, of course. Can I keep at least a teaspoon? at surely won’t hurt anything.
(movement toward voluntary compliance)
CUSTOMS OFFICER: e smallest amount of dirt can do great harm to the crops. (provides
an explanation) Give me the dirt and you will be able to begin your visit to the United States.
(presumptive statement)
VISITOR: All right. If I have to, I’ll give it to you. I really don’t want to do this. (voluntary
compliance)
In the event that reentering the anger cycle does not produce voluntary
compliance, the customs oﬃcer should develop two options and then allow the
angry person to choose one of the options. Giving angry people two options to
choose from creates the illusion that they’re in control. e following exchange
illustrates the “You choose” technique.
VISITOR: I refuse to give up my dirt.
CUSTOMS OFFICER: You seem pretty adamant about keeping your dirt. (empathic
statement) e regulation states that you can’t bring dirt into the country. You’re going to have
to make a decision. e ﬁrst option is to give up your dirt and enter the country. e second
option is to keep your dirt and not be allowed to enter the country. (presents two options) It’s
your decision. What happens from this point forward is up to you. Choose the option you
prefer. (creating the illusion that the visitor is in control)
VISITOR: I have no real choice because I want to enter the country. You can have the dirt.
(voluntary compliance)
CUSTOMS OFFICER: You made the right decision. Welcome to America.
In each of these scenarios, the oﬃcer maintained the illusion that the visitor
was in control of the situation, but in reality the oﬃcer directed the visitor one
step at a time toward voluntary compliance.
Some people feel they relinquish their authority when they use compliance
techniques that subtly inﬂuence rather than intimidate. Gaining voluntary
compliance through breaking the anger cycle not only enhances your authority
but also reduces the probability that the contact will go awry and the angry
person will just get madder and less compliant. By your breaking the anger
cycle, there is a good chance the angry person will go along with the decision
you wanted them to make and, at the same time, feel you treated them with
respect. O ne couldn’t hope for a better outcome to an angry confrontation.
WHEN RELATIONSHIPS “GO SOUTH” EVEN AFTER YOU’VE TRIED TO SAVE
THEM
If you utilize the tools described in this book to establish and maintain healthy,
happy relationships, you will almost always be successful. But what if, even
after your best eﬀorts, a short- or long-term relationship goes bad? What then?
Particularly with long-term interactions, where a signiﬁcant amount of time
and commitment has already been invested in the relationship, one would
hope relationships would not be casually discarded at the ﬁrst signs of distress.
And, in fact, they usually aren’t. Most individuals enter into marriages and
other forms of long-term relationships with the intention of staying in them.
Yet there are times when even well-intentioned and responsible individuals
ﬁnd it diﬃcult, if not impossible, to remain in a long-term relationship. Why?
ere are many reasons, but some of the most common include:
• A divergence of interests. Individuals who might have shared the same outlook and career
paths in their twenties may have diﬀerent perspectives thirty years later. A new career or life
focus can weigh heavily on a long-term relationship if both parties are not seeing eye to eye on
the change(s) involved.
• e “empty nest” syndrome. When children leave the nest, one or both of the parents
sometimes choose the same option.
• e need for more freedom. Couples who have been together for a long time, particularly if
they married young, sometimes feel “trapped” and yearn for the freedom they see their single
friends enjoying. is is a classic case of “the grass is greener” syndrome. Married people yearn
for the freedom that single people have and single people yearn for the commitment that
married people enjoy.
• e need for change. Ever wonder why people in their late sixties and seventies opt to end
long-term relationships? Sometimes it is simply the recognition that one doesn’t live forever
and that if one desires the chance to experience a diﬀerent lifestyle, the window of opportunity
is closing fast.
• Changes in personality in one or both partners. Our personalities are not static or set in
stone by the time we are adolescents. We change over time and if these changes drive people
apart, they usually end up parting.
• ird-party disruptions. Behavioral scientists have long debated the issue of whether humans
are “naturally” monogamous. While they continue to argue, long-term relationships continue
to crumble due to inﬁdelity and partner replacement with a new love interest.
• Boredom. Too much of the same thing can create boredom, an accelerant for relationship
breakdowns, which can make once-exciting interactions seem mundane and unsatisfying.
