CONVERSATIONAL BRIDGE-BACKS
When encountering individuals you met earlier, you can employ a
conversational bridge-back. is refers to your use of portions of earlier
discussions at a later time. Conversational bridge-backs can be comments,
jokes, gestures, or other things unique to the earlier conversation. Using a
conversational bridge-back sends the subtle message that you are not a
newcomer to the person’s circle of friends and acquaintances. You are a familiar
person with mutual interests. Conversational bridge-backs also allow you to
pick up the friend-building process where it left oﬀ at the end of the ﬁrst
conversation. at, in turn, allows you to move forward in your friendship
building without having to start out from scratch.
FOOT BEHAVIORAL CUES WHEN A PERSON IS ALONE
If you see a person standing alone and his or her feet are pointed toward the
exit, there’s a good chance that they are thinking about leaving but haven’t yet
made the move. is provides you with an opening to approach that person.
Give friend signals as you approach and then make an empathic statement
(discussed in the next chapter) like “Oh, I see you’re ready to leave” or “Oh,
you ﬁnd the party boring.” You can use such a statement because you are just
describing the physical stance you have observed, which reﬂects that
individual’s inner feelings. Or you might walk up and simply say, “Oh, I see
you’re here by yourself today. What do you think of the place (or event)?”
Hopefully, the person will respond to your inquiry, and you can use the
response to continue the conversation and see how things go from there.
OUT OF THE FIREFLY AND INTO THE FRIENDSHIP: THE NEXT STEP
e making of a friend or foe begins at the ﬁrst moment of contact, usually
visual, and moves forward from there. is chapter has focused almost
exclusively on the nonverbal signals we send out to others and the impact they
have on personal relationships. Because people normally see us before they hear
us, our nonverbal signals are like “coming attractions” or “trailers” for movies,
giving the viewer advance notice of what they can expect from the main
attraction and helping them decide if it’s worth their time to pursue or avoid.
DON’T BASK IN THIS SPOTLIGHT!
If you use your friend signals eﬀectively, you will have set the stage for a
successful interaction to follow. Getting another person’s attention and, at the
same time, encouraging them to see you in a positive light is a critical ﬁrst step
on the path to making friends, but you need to be careful to not bask in the
spotlight. Intentionally sending friend (or foe) signals takes practice.
Subconsciously, people are very adept at transmitting these nonverbal
communications. However, now that you have read about these signals and are
aware of them, you will begin to notice other people sending and receiving
them and, from time to time, you will catch yourself in the act of signaling
others.
In order to consciously imitate the same signals you subconsciously send with
ease and authenticity, you must overcome the spotlight eﬀect. e spotlight
eﬀect triggers when you do something surreptitiously and, because you are
making a conscious eﬀort to inﬂuence people’s behavior, you think that
everybody is aware of what you are doing. is, in turn, makes it diﬃcult for
you to make your behavior appear natural and appropriate, resulting in an
inability to perform your actions in a convincing manner. e end result: Your
actions are not believable or believed.
An example of the spotlight eﬀect in action involves someone who lies. e
liar thinks that the person he is lying to can see right through the lie, even
when that individual is totally unaware of the deception. is, in turn, causes
the liar to display verbal and nonverbal cues that actually indicate deception,
allowing the person on the receiving end of the lie to detect the deception or,
at least, become suspicious of what is being said.
e same thing happens when you ﬁrst attempt to consciously imitate
friend signals. You’ve been successfully sending these signals throughout your
life; yet, the ﬁrst few times you approach people and consciously attempt to tilt
your head and display an eyebrow ﬂash, you will think they know you’re
socially awkward. e spotlight eﬀect takes hold. is causes you to “force” the
