messages can gain instant Internet immortality, leaving you with a
cyberfootprint, which, unlike a footprint in the sand, is not easily washed
away!
Increasingly, prospective employers, potential lovers, would-be stalkers,
businesses, and even government agencies are using your cyber activities to
learn more about you and make decisions about how they will treat you, even
if the information they use is decades old!
Please keep in mind that what you post is who you are . . . forever.
Whenever you sit down at the computer and sign onto the Internet, always
keep this sentence in mind: “Would I be embarrassed if what I am about to do
would suddenly appear on the front page of my local newspaper tomorrow, in
a month, or in ten years?” If the answer is “yes” or “maybe,” stop and think
before you hit the send button or enter key . . . i t just might save you heartache
and disappointment tomorrow and down the road.
LEARN AND USE PROPER DIGITAL ETIQUETTE WHEN VISITING
CYBERSPACE
Technology is evolving so quickly that social norms for using things like
computers and smartphones don’t always keep pace. Nevertheless, there are
some general guidelines that, if followed, should make online experiences safer
and more enjoyable for you and those around you. It will also increase your
chances for making friends, rather than enemies, both online and in the
immediate vicin ity where you are texting, talking, or searching.
Smartphones
In a Florida movie theater a man was shot to death for using his smartphone
after the house lights were dimmed. Chances are you won’t experience a similar
fate should you choose to text or talk in an inappropriate manner or place;
however, there are simple guidelines you’ll want to follow to protect yourself
and your information from harm.
1. All mobile communication devices should be silenced in any public or private location where a
ringtone would be distracting and/or inappropriate.
2. All mobile communication device users should refrain from speaking on their phones in any
public or private location where vocalizations would be distracting and/or inappropriate.
(Example: I didn’t go out for a relaxing meal at a nice restaurant to hear your long-winded
discourse about problems at home or work.)
3. Smartphones can be hacked. Pictures and other information you would not want to see
reprinted in your local newspaper would best be removed from the device.
4. Most cell phone bills provide a detailed history of calls to and from your device. If you would
prefer that others not know who you called and who called you, it might be wise to keep this
in mind.
5. Recording yourself doing things which, for lack of a better word, might be deemed
inappropriate by others is probably not a good idea. Case in point: A woman from the United
Kingdom picked up her boyfriend’s smartphone and found images of him having sex with a
dog. To make matters worse, it was her dog! How the woman reacted to this chain of events
was not reported.
6. “Sexting”—particularly when pictures are included—is just not a good idea, even between
husband and wife. ese photos have a nasty way of suddenly appearing on social media
websites, particularly if the husband and wife get divorced and one or both of them are
vindictive.
7. Don’t Let V/R (Virtual Reality) trump R/W (Real World) relationships. Individuals vary in
their tolerance of cell phone conversations (and constantly checking social media) undertaken
by someone they are with. Even if your companion (date, friend, or business associate) is more
tech-savvy and tolerant than most, it is still considered inappropriate for you to be taking calls,
checking messages, and frequently glancing over at your cell during your time together. In an
earlier chapter on verbal communication, I pointed out how important it was to listen in a
focused manner to the person you are talking with. It shows interest and respect, fostering a
superior environment for making people like you and keeping friends. If you insist on seeing
your phone as an umbilical cord in the presence of others, don’t expect the birth of a good
relationship.
8. Because cell phones retain their initial area code (regardless of where they are used) and,
further, because transmission of cell phone conversations is not always clear, it is important
when you leave your number for a callback that you start with the area code and repeat the
entire number twice. at way, you increase your chances that the recipient of your message
will have the information necessary to get back to you.
Electronic Messages (Email)
1. Emails fall somewhere between text messages and letters when it comes to how formal or
informal your communication can be. Obviously, emails to prospective employers or
important business contacts should be more reﬂective of a traditional letter, well thought out,
and grammatically sound. at being said, it is advisable to keep all emails free of the type of
abbreviations normally used in texting, and check for spelling mistakes before transmitting
your messages.
2. Carefully consider your screen name when using email communications. A screen name that
might be acceptable for communications between friends could be wildly inappropriate if used
when contacting prospective employers or your kid’s school oﬃcial. One of my colleagues who
teaches human resource management in a business school showed me her “Inappropriate
