Most of us have family members or extended family members who are
employed in the same or similar occupations as the people we speak with. In
Audrey’s case, her sister is an accountant, which is a similar ﬁeld to ﬁnancial
planning. If you don’t have a family member or relative working in the same or
similar ﬁeld as your person of interest, think of a friend who is. Using the
technique of vicarious experiences can pay dividends whenever you are trying
to establish a relationship. Exercise caution, however: Do not lie to the person
you are meeting for the ﬁrst time. If your relationship blossoms, then the truth
may be revealed. Broken trust, especially occurring at the beginning of a
relationship, can quickly turn oﬀ the Like Switch.
THE LAW OF MISATTRIBUTION
Sometimes making friends is simply a matter of being in the right place at the
right time. When people feel good about themselves and do not attribute the
good feeling to a speciﬁc cause, they tend to associate the cause of that good
feeling with the person who is physically close to them at the time. If you
happen to be that person, you’re going to beneﬁt and be liked not for anything
you did but because of the “misattribution.” In a sense, what we have here is a
case of collateral beneﬁt rather than collateral damage.
Consider this example. When people exercise, their brains release
endorphins. e release of endorphins gives these individuals a nonspeciﬁc
sense of well-being. Since the eﬀect of the endorphins is not directly attributed
to exercise, the good feeling tends to be linked to another person, if one
happens to be nearby. ink of it as the “collateral beneﬁt.” Since that good
feeling is “misattributed” to the nearby person, he or she is subconsciously seen
as the cause of the good feeling and, therefore, appears more attractive.
How can you use this information to get someone to like you? Actually, you
can take advantage of this phenomenon in a number of ways. If you are in
shape, you can arrange a meeting around an exercise activity, join a ﬁtness
club, or participate in sports (organized walks or runs—“fun” or otherwise—
provide a great opportunity for misattribution to work).
USING MISATTRIBUTION TO GET A DATE: “EXERCISE” YOUR OPTIONS
Let’s assume you want to ask a person of interest on a date and want to
increase your chances of getting a positive response. Using the Law of
Misattribution might do the trick. If you discover that the person you want to
meet jogs or exercises regularly, arrange for a “chance meeting” during or
shortly after he or she completes their exercise regimen. e encounter does
not have to include a verbal exchange. Simply sharing the same space can
induce misattribution and will make you appear more attractive. If both you
and your person of interest work out, try to arrange your workout time to
coincide with theirs. Being nearby during the exercise will produce the
collateral beneﬁts already discussed. If the person you want to meet is a
coworker who exercises, be in the vicinity of their oﬃce or cubicle when they
return from their physical activit y. Likewise, if you know the person you are
interested in goes to a coﬀee shop every day after his or her exercise routine,
make sure you are present at the shop at the time they arrive.
What you are trying to do is take advantage of the misattribution principle
and increase your attractiveness in the eyes of the other person by being
associated with the good feelings that come about through the release of
exercise-related endorphins. To accomplish this objective, you need to be in
close physical proximity to the person during or soon after the endorphins are
released.
Surprisingly, misattribution also occurs when people experience frightening
events or traumatic experiences. People feel closer relationships with others
with whom they share the same frightening or traumatic experiences. Soldiers
who survive harrowing battles form deep bonds with their comrades in arms.
Police oﬃcers develop close relationships with their partners after they share
traumatic experiences. In the days when it was allowed (or tolerated), “hazing”
of sorority and fraternity pledges brought those who survived the ordeal closer
together and often created lasting friendships.
A scary movie can evoke the same response. If you go with someone to a
scary movie, the shared frightful experience triggers misattribution, which in
turn increases attraction between the moviegoers. For that reason, arranging to
see a scary movie is ideal for a ﬁrst date because it increases the chance for
mutual attraction in a new relationship. Likewise, if your long-term
relationship with someone is waning, go skydiving or bungee jumping, ride a
