e empathic presumptive keeps the focus of the conversation on the customer
and presents a fact as the truth. e presumptive can be either true or an
assumed fact regardless of its veracity. If the presumptive is true, the customer
will usually add new information to the conversation.
e salesperson could then construct another empathic statement based on
the customer’s response to prompt more information. If the presumptive is
false, the customer will typically correct the presumptive. Just look at this
example:
SALESPERSON: May I help you?
CUSTOMER: Yes, I have to buy a new washer and dryer.
SALESPERSON: So, your old washer and dryer are on their last legs? (empathic presumptive)
CUSTOMER: No, I’m moving to a small apartment.
SALESPERSON: Oh, so you’ll need a compact washer and dryer. Let me show you a popular
stacked unit that we sell.
CUSTOMER: Okay.
e salesperson listened to what the customer said, “I have to buy a new
washer and dryer,” which suggests the customer’s current washer and dryer are
not functioning well. e salesperson used the empathic presumptive to keep
the focus on the customer and encourage the customer to aﬃrm or deny the
presumptive, “So, your old washer and dryer are on their last legs?” e
customer corrected the salesperson by saying, “I’m moving to a small
apartment.” is added information identiﬁes what type of unit the
salesperson should direct the customer to. e words “have to buy” indicates
that the customer is serious about buying a washing machine and dryer as
opposed to just looking. e salesperson obtained important facts during the
opening exchange of information. First, the customer is a serious buyer and the
sales person knows exactly what category of washer and dryer the customer is
likely to purchase. is information saves the customer and the salesperson
time. e customer goes home with the product he needs and the salesperson
has more time to serve other customers.
EMPATHIC CONDITIONAL
e empathic conditional keeps the focus of the conversation on the customer
and introduces a set of circumstances under which the customer would
purchase a product or service.
SALESPERSON: Can I help you?
CUSTOMER: No, I’m just looking.
SALESPERSON: So, you haven’t decided which model you want to buy. (empathic statement)
CUSTOMER: I need a new car, but I’m not sure I can aﬀord one.
SALESPERSON: So you’d buy a car, if it were priced right? (empathic conditional)
CUSTOMER: Sure.
SALESPERSON: Do you like red or blue cars?
CUSTOMER: Blue.
SALESPERSON: Let’s take a look at some blue cars in your price range.
In response to the empathic elicitation, the customer identiﬁed the reason
preventing him from buying a car. e salesperson then used the empathic
conditional approach. e empathic conditional keeps the focus on the
customer and, at the same time, sets up the if/then conditional “So you’d buy a
car, if it were priced right?” e underlying presumption is that the customer is
going to buy a car if certain conditions are met. In this case, the condition is
price. e empathic conditional helped the salesperson to identify a buying
objective. With this new information, the salesperson can direct the customer
to lines of cars within his price range.
THE NEED TO RECIPROCATE USING THE PRINCIPLE OF QUID PRO QUO
When people receive something either physically or emotionally, they feel the
need to reciprocate by giving back something of equal or greater value (Law of
Reciprocity). Quid pro quo is an elicitation technique that encourages people
to match information provided by others. For example, you meet a person for
the ﬁrst time and want to know where they work. Instead of directly asking
them, “Where do you work?” tell them where you work ﬁrst. People will tend
to reciprocate by telling you where they work. is elicitation technique can be
used to discover information about people without being intrusive and
appearing nosy.
If you don’t want people to know where you work but are still curious
about where they are employed, you can get the needed information from the
other person and short-circuit reciprocity by asking the question in a novel
way. Say, “Where do you labor?” is question requires additional cognitive
