the person who is right doesn’t give the person who is wrong a face-saving way
to extrica te himself or herself from the situation in question.
I learned this the hard way while presenting a lecture on report writing to a
group of parole and probation oﬃcers. Prior to the beginning of my lecture, I
spoke with several of the participants about their current report writing
practices . One participant identiﬁed his super visor as the writing guru. e
other participants agreed and made comments such as “He really knows his
stuﬀ,” “He’s a wordsmith,” “He forces us to use a variety of words to say the
same thing,” and “I don’t know what we would do without him.”
I glanced over at the supervisor. His eyes were alight and he was smiling
proudly. at conversation and the supervisor’s reaction was a red ﬂag I failed
to recognize until it was too late. e supervisor’s esteem was wrapped up in
his identity as the group’s grammar guru. His value to the agency also stemmed
from his reputation as an outstanding writer.
During my lecture, I demonstrated a simple yet eﬀective method to write
reports patterned after the FBI model for producing such documents. Several
participants commented they were going to start using this model because it
was easier and reduced the possibility of their reports being successfully
challenged in court.
I was taken aback when the supervisor protested. He argued that the
method of writing I was teaching may work for the FBI, but it was not suitable
for his agency. He declared that he was a college English major and believed
that creative reports using synonyms were more interesting than reports using
the same words over and over. I then made a fatal mistake by engaging the
supervisor in spontaneous role playing to prove that I was right and,
consequently, that he was wrong. I asked him what synonyms he would use for
the verb said. He oﬀered the following alternatives: told, explained, and
mentioned. I stopped him there and told him to play the role of a witness in
court and I would play the role of defense attorney. He agreed. e exchange
went like this:
ME (DEFENSE ATTORNEY): Oﬃcer, please deﬁne the word stated as you used it in your
report.
SUPERVISOR (OFFICER): Express a fact with certainty.
ME (DEFENSE ATTORNEY): ank you oﬃcer. How would you deﬁne the word explained as
you used the word in your report?
SUPERVISOR (OFFICER): To talk about.
ME (DEFENSE ATTORNEY): ank you, Oﬃcer. So what you wrote is that what my client
initially said he said with certainty and the second thing my client said he did not say with
certainty.
SUPERVISOR (OFFICER): “No, that’s not what I meant. e suspect said both things with
certainty.”
ME (DEFENSE ATTORNEY): at’s not what you wrote. By your own deﬁnitions of the
words said and explain, you are saying that the ﬁrst statement was said with certainty and that
the second statement was not said with certainty. Is that correct?
SUPERVISOR (OFFICER): No, both statements were said with certainty.
ME (DEFENSE ATTORNEY): If both statements were said with certainty, then why didn’t you
use the word said in both sentences?
SUPERVISOR (OFFICER): Uhhh. I don’t know.
I won my point, but it was a Pyrrhic victory. My need to be right caused
everything to go wrong. From that point forward, the tension in the room was
obvious. I forced the participants to choose between a more eﬃcient method
of writing and their supervisor’s less eﬃcient method of writing. Of course,
they sided with their supervisor.
e unintended consequences of being right occur every day in oﬃces and
homes across the country. We unintentionally alienate our bosses, colleagues,
friends, and spouses and cause unnecessary strife and tension.
ere is a better way. You can be right without wronging someone. Instead
of asserting your right to be right, ask people for their advice. at allows them
to be part of the decision-making process. Additionally, they feel good about
themselves because you came to them to seek their advice, which elevates them
to an honored position. e Golden Rule of Friendship states that if you make
people feel good about themselves, they will like you.
Using this “ask for advice” strategy still allows you to be right, get the results
you want, and maintain (or increase) friendships with those individuals who
now have a face-saving way to maintain their dignity and avoid being seen as
“wrong.”
e following exchange between a subordinate and her boss illustrates the
technique of seeking advice. e subordinate found an error in a newly formed
controversial policy prepared by her boss. Rather than trumping her boss with
the “right” card, she sought her super visor’s advice.
SUBORDINATE: Do you have a minute, Boss?
BOSS: Sure, what’s up?
