Charles’s presence and the FBI agent’s seemingly unexplainable reluctance to
approach him. is introduced one type of intensity, curiosity, into the mix.
When a new stimulus is introduced into a person’s environment (in this case a
stranger enters Seagull’s world), the brain is hardwired to determine if that new
stimulus pre sents a threat or a perceived threat. If the new stimulus is judged
to be a threat, the person will attempt to eliminate or neutralize it by
employing the ﬁght or ﬂight response. If, on the other hand, the new stimulus
is not perceived as a threat, then it becomes the object of curiosity. e person
wants to learn more about the new stimulus: What is it? Why is it there? Can I
use it to my beneﬁt?
Charles’s activitie s were conducted at a safe distance and, over time, became
the object of Seagull’s curiosity. is curiosity motivated Seagull to discover
who Charles was and what he wanted.
Seagull later told Charles that he knew he was an FBI agent the ﬁrst time he
saw him. Whether this was true or not, Seagull received the nonverbal “friend”
signals the FBI agent was sending him.
Once Seagull determined that Charles was an FBI agent, his curiosity
increased. He certainly knew he was a target of recruitment, but for what
purpose and at what price? Since Seagull was already unhappy with his career
advancement and looming retirement, he no doubt thought about diﬀerent
scenarios involving Charles, including working as a spy for the FBI.
e decision to become a spy is not made overnight. Potential spies need
time to develop their own rationalization strategies and time to grow
accustomed to switching their allegiance. e recruitment strategy for Seagull
included a length of time for the seed of betrayal to germinate. Seagull’s
imagination provided the necessary nutrients for the idea to mature and
bloom. is latency period also provided time for Seagull to convince his wife
to join him. As Charles moved physically closer to Seagull, the diplomat did
not see the FBI agent as a pending threat but rather as a symbol of hope—
hope for a better life in the years to come.
Once Seagull made up his mind to assist the FBI, he had to wait for
Charles to approach him. Seagull later told Charles that the wait was
excruciating. His curiosity peaked. “Why wasn’t the American operative
making a move?” In fact, the second thing Seagull said to Charles when he
ﬁnally introduced himself at the grocery store was “What took you so long?”
FREQUENCY AND DURATION
Duration has a unique quality in that the more time you spend with a person,
the more inﬂuence they have over your thoughts and actions. Mentors who
spend a lot of time with their mentees exercise a positive inﬂuence over them.
People who have less than honorable intentions can negatively inﬂuence the
people they spend time with. e best example of the power of duration is
between parents and their children. e more time parents spend with their
children, the more likely the parents will be able to inﬂuence them. If parental
duration is lacking, the children tend to spend more time with their friends,
including, in extreme cases, gang members. ese people now have a greater
inﬂuence on children because they spend most of their time with them.
Duration shares an inverse relationship with frequency. If you see a friend
frequently, then the duration of the encounter will be shorter. Conversely, if
you don’t see your friend very often, the duration of your visit will typically
increase signiﬁcantly. For example, if you see a friend every day, the duration of
your visits can be low because you can keep up with what’s going on as events
unfold. If, however, you only see your friend twice a year, the duration of your
visits will be greater. ink back to a time when you had dinner in a restaurant
with a friend you hadn’t seen for a long period of time. You probably spent
several hours catching up on each other’s lives. e duration of the same
dinner would be considerably shorter if you saw the person on a regular basis.
Conversely, in romantic relationships the frequency and duration are very high
because couples, especially newly minted ones, want to spend as much time
with each other as possible. e intensity of the relationship will also be very
high.
RELATIONSHIP SELF-EVALUATION
ink back to the beginning of your current relationship or a relationship you
had in the past; you should now be able to see that it developed in accordance
