DIGITAL DETECTIVES
As you know by now, I am a frequent ﬂyer. This time, I approached the gate at the Nashville airport to see if I
could ﬂy standby on an earlier ﬂight, but this story is not about me getting an upgrade. The gate clerks, a man
and a woman, were intently examining a very expensive digital camera. I heard them comment to each other,
“There’s no name on the camera or any other unique identifying information. We have to ﬁnd out who this
camera belongs to and give it back to them.” I asked them what they were doing.” In unison they said, “We’re
the FBI agents of American Airlines.” I told them I was a real FBI agent, although I was retired. I asked them
how they could ﬁnd the owner of the camera without any clues. The man explained that they would turn the
camera on and look for clues in the pictures the owner took. I was intrigued as I saw them go through the
process of solving the digital puzzle. As they shufﬂed through the date-stamped pictures, they gathered digital
clues. The owner was a male of Hispanic descent. It appeared that he had spent three days in Las Vegas,
probably on business, because there were no family pictures. He stayed at the Bellagio Hotel. They continued to
scroll through the pictures. The woman high-ﬁved the man and shrieked, “I found it!” She showed me the
picture on the camera that was taken the previous week. The photo depicted a newer, wood-frame house with
blue siding. I saw the picture, but I didn’t see what triggered their excitement. She pointed to the house and
said, “Those kinds of houses are typically built on the East Coast in mid-Atlantic states.” “Okay,” I thought, “so
what?” She then directed me to the barely visible “For Sale” sign in the front yard. “Okay,” I said, not sure of
the signiﬁcance of the sign. She used the camera’s zoom feature to make the address and telephone number of
the real estate agency clearly visible. The real estate ofﬁce was in Columbia, South Carolina. I ﬁnally got it. I
blurted out loud, “The owner of the camera was probably from Columbia, South Carolina, because people
typically don’t take pictures of houses for sale unless they are considering a purchase.” The woman added, “An
earlier ﬂight we boarded was headed to Columbia, South Carolina.” She pulled up the passenger list and,
fortunately, there were only a few Hispanic names listed. I had to board my ﬂight, but I was conﬁdent that the
FBI agents of American Airlines would locate the owner and return the camera. I was amazed by how easy it
was to track the movements of the owner of the lost camera using a few abstract digital clues. I was even more
amazed that they went the extra mile to return the lost camera. They said they returned many lost or forgotten
electronic devices using similar methods. The point of the story is that in a digital world, it’s hard to remain
anonymous. Keep this in mind the next time you post something on the Internet or do something as benign as
taking a digital photograph.
CATPHISH OR CAVIAR: WHAT YOU NEED TO KNOW BEFORE DEVELOPING
ONLINE RELATIONSHIPS
e Internet provides a fertile environment for growing friendships and even
lifelong liaisons between individuals. is has led to the development of
websites that facilitate the online “dating” process and make it easier for
individuals interested in ﬁnding signiﬁcant others to “hook up.” e people
who own these websites claim great success in getting “soul mates” together:
providing the mechanism through which people meet online and, eventually,
establish long-term commitments in the real world.
Using the Internet to ﬁnd “Mr.” or “Ms. Right” can be a rewarding
experience. It can also be a living hell. How your experience turns out depends
on many factors, most of which will be discussed here. Although no one can
guarantee that your Internet-generated relationships will be successful and
trouble-free, there are some things you can do to increase your chances of
experiencing positive outcomes—and reducing negative ones—when it comes
to choosing friends and potential partners online.
LOVE AT FIRST BYTE
e young man was a star Notre Dame football player who fell in love with a
woman he met online. en tragedy struck: his sweetheart died of leukemia.
To make matters worse, she died on the same day the football player’s
grandmother passed away.
e star player’s twin tragedies became a national news item. But that story
was soon eclipsed by an even bigger story: it turned out that the woman he
loved didn’t die after all, because she never lived in the ﬁrst place! It turned out
she was a person created in cyberspace by someone with a very sick sense of
humor.
And then there’s the saga of Sana and Adnan Klaric. It seems the couple’s
married life was not going well and so, unbeknownst to each other, each Klaric
assumed a fake screen name, Sweetie and Prince of Joy respectively, and hit the
online chat rooms complaining about their dismal marriage and searching for a
new “Mr.” and “Mrs.” Right.
It took some time and a lot of keystrokes but at last the two estranged
partners found online individuals who seemed to resonate with their problems
and provide the kind words so missing in their marriage.
Sana and Adnan knew they had found the real loves of their lives. ey
agreed to meet their new partners at a prearranged time and place. On the big
day, Sana and Adnan made excuses to each other about having to leave for
appointments, each making sure their indiscretion would not be detected.
en they set oﬀ to meet their online paramours, the perfect replacements for
what they had back home.
