To my wife, Helen, a woman overﬂowing with love, strength of
character, and, above all, patience for enduring my antics for over three
decades of marriage.
JACK SCHAFER
To my wife, Edyth, and daughter, Amber: for who you are, for what
you’ve accomplished, for your love that has enriched so many lives.
MARVIN KARLINS
THE LIKE SWITCH
How to Turn People On to You
When you hear “FBI,” you likely don’t think the Friendly Bureau of
Investigation. But my twenty years as an agent specializing in behavioral
analysis enhanced my ability to quickly read people and gave me a unique
understanding of human nature and shared human behaviors. And my work,
which ranged from convincing people to spy on their own country to
identifying perpetrators and convincing them to confess, allowed me to
develop many incredibly powerful methods for getting people to trust me,
often without me saying a word. In my role as behavioral analyst for the FBI’s
Behavioral Analysis Program, I developed strategies to recruit spies and make
friends out of sworn foes. In other words, I developed speciﬁc skills and
techniques that could turn an enemy of the United States into a friend who
was willing to become a spy for America.
My profession boiled down to getting people to like me. My work with
“Vladimir” (I have changed the names and identifying characteristics of those I
discuss and have created some composites to best illustrate what my work has
demonstrated) illustrates this point well.
Vladimir had illegally entered the United States to commit espionage. He
was caught in possession of classiﬁed defense documents. As an FBI Special
Agent, I was assigned to interview Vladimir. At our ﬁrst meeting he made a
vow not to speak to me under any circumstances. I then began the process of
countering his deﬁance by simply sitting opposite him and reading a
newspaper. But at a carefully planned time, I deliberately folded the newspaper
and left without saying a word. Day after day and week after week I sat across
from him and read the newspaper while he remained mute, handcuﬀed to a
nearby table.
