“I train people,” I replied.
“Train people in what?” she asked.
“To be nice to people . . . to  get things they don’t deserve.” (curiosity hook)
She laughed. “Like what?”
“Like an upgrade.”
We were both grinning at this point. I said: “If I walked up to you and
asked for an upgrade, would you do it?”
“No,” she exclaimed. “People do that all the time and I say no.”
“So do you ever give upgrades?”
“Yeah, to people I like.”
Case closed.
Whether you’re in Afghanistan or Atlanta, the techniques in this book
work, alone or in combination. When you use them, you maximize your
chances for making friends, even with those individuals who start out seeing
you as an enemy. And, who knows, you just might get an upgrade in the
process.
4
THE LAWS OF ATTRACTION
If you go looking for a friend, you’re going to ﬁnd they’re very scarce. If you go out to be a
friend, you’ll ﬁnd them everywhere.
—ZIG ZIGLAR
In this chapter I will give you some additional tools for your friendship
toolbox: the “Laws of Attraction.” ese “laws” describe certain factors that,
when present, serve to heighten the probability that two individuals will be
drawn to each other and experience a positive outcome when they interact.
Because these laws play a critica l role in shaping human relationships, if you
can incorporate them into your own relationship interactions they will provide
additional ways for you to make friends with the people you meet.
ink of each Law of Attraction as a tool to enhance your relationship
eﬀectiveness. You don’t have to use them all to achieve your friendship
objectives; in fact, you shouldn’t, because some of the laws are not congruent
with your personal characteristics or are designed to work with long- versus
short-term relationships (a onetime encounter with a sales clerk as opposed to
the development of a lasting friendship). Pick the ones that suit you the best
and go with those when interacting with persons of interest.
THE LAW OF SIMILARITY (“COMMON GROUND” )
People who share the same perspectives, attitudes, and activities tend to
develop close relationships. e adage “Birds of a feather ﬂock together” has
merit. People are attracted to other people who share their interests. e need
to avoid cognitive dissonance may explain why this is true. Dissonance occurs
