e purpose of using friend signals when ﬁrst meeting a stranger is to
encourage them to allow you into their territory without them feeling
threatened or under siege. If a person you wish to meet judges you as friendly,
then he or she will be more willing to allow you to enter their personal space.
Territorial boundaries are, of course, invisible and can vary from person to
person and from culture to culture. For example, a person who has been
physically abused will typically have a larger personal space to protect himself
or herself from anyone who poses a physical threat. Similarly, an individual
who has been emotionally hurt may be very cautious about who they allow
into their personal space, for fear of being emotionally hurt again. In extreme
cases, physically and/or emotionally abused persons build walls around
themselves that are too high to climb over and too thick to penetrate in an
attempt to protect themselves against any further physical or psychological
pain.
Territorial boundaries are also aﬀected by where people live. In societies
where people live in close quarters, they establish smaller personal boundaries
out of necessity. Conversely, people who are accustomed to wide-open spaces
create larger personal spaces. Mental health can also aﬀect personal space. Ted
Kaczynski, the Unabomber, lived in an isolated cabin in Montana. He
perceived anyone who came within half a mile of his cabin as a threat and
prepared to defend himself against those who encroached on his personal
space.
Because people have such wide variations in what they consider “their”
territory and personal space, it is important that you take this into
consideration when attempting to make friends with someone you do not
know. After sending out friend signals, and receiving like signals in return,
approach the individual carefully and observe their body language as you do. If
the individual shows signs of stress or negative reactions, such as backing away
or disapproving facial expressions, stop your forward progress and do not move
closer to that person until he or she gives you verbal or nonverbal clues that
they are ready for that.
People tend to be slow to yield personal territory, especially when it comes
to parking spaces. When you have been driving circles in a crowded parking
lot, looking for a spot, and ﬁnally see someone getting ready to leave, you
immediately activate your turn signal to mark your turf. You are eﬀectively
telling other drivers to back oﬀ because this is your parking space. Now the
waiting game begins. e driver who is about to pull out of the space ﬁdgets
and ﬁddles with various gadgets mounted on the dashboard, painstakingly
taking his or her time to properly adjust the seat belt and mirrors. You ask
yourself, “What’s taking this person so long to pull out?” e answer is that
they are masters of their space and will not surrender it until they are good and
ready. Interestingly, people leave parking spaces sooner if no one is waiting to
pull in.
DOGMATIC VIEW OF TERRITORIAL FOE SIGNALS
Pets, particularly dogs, provide interesting examples of territorial behavior. For
example, two people enter a friend’s house for the ﬁrst time. One person is an
avid dog lover and the other individual hates dogs. e dog lover immediately
focuses his or her attention on the dog, looks the dog directly in the eyes, and
bends down to pet the animal. To the dog lover’s surprise, the canine growls
and bares its teeth. e dog hater, on the other hand, limits physical and visual
contact with the dog. To the dog hater’s chagrin, the animal approaches, sniﬀs,
and eagerly seeks his attention.
e dog’s reaction to the two strangers seems counterintuitive, but when
viewed from a territorial perspective, it makes perfect sense. e dog lover
violated the animal’s physical space by moving toward it and further challenged
the animal by looking directly into its eyes at ground level. Both dogs and
humans perceive staring as a threatening (foe signal) gesture. e dog viewed
the canine lover’s presence as a threat or a potential threat; therefore, the dog
presented an aggressive threat to protect its territory. With familiarity, the dog
lover will eventually be accepted. Conversely, the dog hater ignored the animal
and consequently posed no territorial threat. Without an actual or perceived
threat, the dog became intrigued by the stranger. In an eﬀort to satisfy natural
curiosity (the same “hook” that got Vladimir to talk to me and Seagull
interested in Charles, the FBI agent), the dog approached the person who
hated it.
