e host would have none of it. “If you want to keep this consulting job,
you need to apologize to the father.”
Faced with that ultimatum, my friend decided discretion was the better part
of valor and oﬀered his apology to the distraught father.
WHEN EVERYTHING ISN’T BLACK-AND-WHITE
e classroom seems to provide a particularly conducive environment for word
mines to rattle an unsuspecting lecturer. Two reasons for this is the diversity of
today’s student body and the larger number of enrollees in any particular
course. When it comes to racial issues, teachers must tiptoe carefully through
their lectures, being careful not to set oﬀ a word mine by using words or
phrases that mean diﬀerent things to diﬀerent students. In one of my classes, I
couldn’t get my laptop to boot up. Every time I switched it on all I got was a
black screen. So I asked my students, “Does anyone here know how to make
this thing work?” One student nodded, walked over to the laptop, made a few
adjustments to the machine, and handed it back to me. I said, “Well, the
screen is white and white is better than black at least.”
A black student in the class took immediate oﬀense at my comment. “I
heard you say ‘white is better than black,’ ” he declared. “at’s a racist
remark.”
I had no intention of making a racial slur. Race never crossed my mind. I
was anxious to get my laptop functional so I could present my lecture. My
comment referred to how my laptop was operating. A black screen indicated
the laptop was not booting up. A white screen indicated that the laptop was
booting up. In other words, a laptop that is booting up is better than a laptop
that is not booting up. Yet, my student heard the comment from a diﬀerent
perspective and it triggered a deep emotional response. Such is the nature and
danger of word mines.
Another teacher related another good example of this to me. She teaches a
course in international management, which means a large number of students
from other countries are in attendance. At the beginning of one class, about
halfway through the semester, a male American student walked up to another
male student and greeted him by saying, “How’s it going, dawg?!” e
recipient of this greeting almost punched the speaker in the mouth. It turns
out that the angry student was from the Middle East, where it is considered a
great insult to be referred to as a “dog.”
Word mines. Watch for them and be ready to treat the injured relationship
quickly and decisively so as to minimize any damage done. It’s worth saying
again: the hazard of word mines is that speakers do not know what emotional
meanings others attach to otherwise innocuous words. us, they never know
when a word mine can be “set oﬀ.” If, as noted earlier, speakers are not
watching the listener, they might not be aware that they insulted or oﬀended
them.
Even if they do become aware that they have set oﬀ a negative response in
the listener, most speakers, rather than trying to defuse the situation, tend to
respond defensively to the unexpected emotional outburst, which
unfortunately only intensiﬁes the initial response of that individual. A speaker
who steps on a word mine and reacts defensively when confronted with an
angry listener is often seen as insensitive and lacking compassion. e speaker,
on the other hand, is often left confused, not knowing what to do or what to
say in response to the listener’s emotional explosion.
Empathic statements are the best way to respond to word mine explosions.
ey capture a person’s feelings and reﬂect them back to the person, using
parallel language. Empathic statements acknowledge the person’s feelings
without the need to go on the defensive.
As you’ll recall from an earlier chapter, the basic formula for constructing
empathic statements is “So you . . .” is basic approach keeps the focus on the
other person and away from the individual who stepped on the word mine.
People naturally tend to say something to the eﬀect of “I understand how you
feel.” at leads the other person to automatically think, No, you don’t know
how I feel because you are not me.
Empathic statements allow individuals to vent their emotions. Once the
pent-up emotions are vented, the conversation can usually return to a normal
exchange of information. Avoiding a heated argument with an emotional
person increases the probability that the relationship will have a chance to
survive and grow.
