WHO WAS THAT MASKED MAN?
Although it is usually worn by individuals who require it due to a medical condition, a face mask, particularly
the “surgical” kind that covers the mouth and nose of the user, acts as a foe signal even when that is not its
intended purpose.
A masked individual sends out such a powerful foe signal that one person I know used it to increase the
space around him on the notoriously crowded commuter trains that service the New York City area. His modus
operandi was to occupy the window seat where the aisle seat next to him was open. Then, when anyone
approached the unoccupied seat, he would turn his head so that his masked mouth and nose were clearly
visible. Many times the seat remained open until all other available seats in the car were taken.
And he didn’t stop there. If someone did sit next to him, he would begin to twitch and mutter under his
breath. This was usually sufﬁcient to dislodge the newly arrived seatmate. If that didn’t work, he would reach in
his pocket, pull out a pill bottle that obviously was issued from a drugstore, take out a pill, lift up his mask,
and pop the pill in his mouth. Very few people can sit through such an experience and remain in place.
It turns out that karma has its moments. On one particular trip, the masked individual glanced up at a man
moving toward him in the aisle, shifted in his seat to be sure the stranger saw the white surgical mask on his
face, and then turned back to the window. A moment later, he caught a glimpse of the stranger sitting down
next to him. So he went into his twitch-and-mutter scenario. The stranger remained rooted in his chair. Finally,
the masked passenger took out his trusty pill bottle and went through his pill-taking routine. The person next to
him remained, without unmoving.
The masked passenger couldn’t believe his ruse had failed. He turned his head to see what kind of person
could remain in such a threatening environment. What he saw was a seatmate who was now also wearing a
face mask, twitching, and holding a prescription bottle in his hand! That was all he needed to see. Without any
hesitation, he bolted from his window seat and moved down the aisle into the next passenger car.
TERRITORIAL (PERSONAL SPACE) INVASION
ere seem to be deﬁnite consistencies in the ways humans govern the space
around them, that is, the manner in which they regulate the distance between
themselves and other people. e term for such spatial regulation is
territoriality, and the territorial imperative is practiced by humans and lower
animals alike. e underlying principle of territoriality is that many species of
life desire and attempt to maintain a speciﬁed amount and quality of space for
themselves. If you don’t believe that the territorial imperative exists, get on a
bus or subway car occupied by only one other passenger and plop yourself
down next to him. In some instances, people will tolerate an invasion of their
personal space if the invasion occurs in a side-by-side encounter such as in
crowded elevators or at sporting events.
“Invading” another person’s territory—whether through intrusive eye
contact or actual physical closeness—is a powerful foe signal.
e purpose of using friend signals when ﬁrst meeting a stranger is to
encourage them to allow you into their territory without them feeling
threatened or under siege. If a person you wish to meet judges you as friendly,
then he or she will be more willing to allow you to enter their personal space.
Territorial boundaries are, of course, invisible and can vary from person to
person and from culture to culture. For example, a person who has been
physically abused will typically have a larger personal space to protect himself
or herself from anyone who poses a physical threat. Similarly, an individual
who has been emotionally hurt may be very cautious about who they allow
into their personal space, for fear of being emotionally hurt again. In extreme
cases, physically and/or emotionally abused persons build walls around
themselves that are too high to climb over and too thick to penetrate in an
attempt to protect themselves against any further physical or psychological
pain.
Territorial boundaries are also aﬀected by where people live. In societies
where people live in close quarters, they establish smaller personal boundaries
out of necessity. Conversely, people who are accustomed to wide-open spaces
create larger personal spaces. Mental health can also aﬀect personal space. Ted
Kaczynski, the Unabomber, lived in an isolated cabin in Montana. He
perceived anyone who came within half a mile of his cabin as a threat and
prepared to defend himself against those who encroached on his personal
space.
Because people have such wide variations in what they consider “their”
territory and personal space, it is important that you take this into
consideration when attempting to make friends with someone you do not
know. After sending out friend signals, and receiving like signals in return,
approach the individual carefully and observe their body language as you do. If
the individual shows signs of stress or negative reactions, such as backing away
or disapproving facial expressions, stop your forward progress and do not move
closer to that person until he or she gives you verbal or nonverbal clues that
they are ready for that.
People tend to be slow to yield personal territory, especially when it comes
to parking spaces. When you have been driving circles in a crowded parking
lot, looking for a spot, and ﬁnally see someone getting ready to leave, you
