Psychologists conduct some pretty strange and morally suspect experiments
with animals. In this particular investigation, electrodes were implanted in the
auditory area of a cat’s brain. en they didn’t feed the cat for a few days so it
was good and hungry. Once the cat was wired and ravenous, it was placed in a
room with a metronome, an instrument that makes a clicking sound on a
regular basis. Also in the room was an oscilloscope, the kind that translates
sounds into blips on a screen, similar to the way heartbeats are represented by
spikes on a moving piece of paper.
What happened? Every time the metronome made a clicking sound, it was
picked up by the electrode implanted in the cat and simultaneously a blip
appeared on the oscilloscope screen. Translation: e cat heard the clicking
sound. Not really a very dramatic experiment, you might be thinking; hardly
worth depriving a cat of food and making it undergo an operation.
But there’s more, and here is where the experiment gets interesting. A
mouse was introduced into the room. e cat immediately turned its attention
to the potential meal, watching the rodent’s every move with intense interest.
And here’s the shocker: the oscilloscope screen went ﬂat! e metronome was
still clicking, the sound was still entering the cat’s ear, but somehow the animal
was able to block the sound at the brain level. e cat, basically, was no longer
hearing the tick, tick, tick of the metronome. It was so focused on the mouse
that it was able to block out the sounds it was “hearing.”
As it was with the cat so, too, is it with humans. We are able to block out
what a person is saying. e upshot of all this: Just because a person is
speaking to someone does not guarantee that the listener is hearing what is
being said.
e way to be sure you hear what someone is saying is to pay attention to
their verbal pronouncements. is is referred to as active listening and is
something you’ll want to practice if you want to use verbal behavior as a tool
to build new friendships.
When it comes to establishing and building friendships through verbal
behavior, take your cue from LOVE (Listen, Observe, Vocalize, and
Empathize). is acronym captures the four rules you’ll want to follow if you
want to maximize your chances for making friends through the use of
communication.
RULE #1: LISTEN: PAY ATTENTION WHEN PEOPLE SPEAK SO YOU ARE
FULLY AWARE OF WHAT THEY ARE SAYING.
Listening is more than simply remaining silent while your person of interest is
speaking. It involves total focus on what is being said. Because we can think at
about four times the rate the normal person talks, there is a temptation to let
our thoughts wander. Resist this temptation.
Speakers notice when a person isn’t listening. e best way to focus on the
listener’s speech and, at the same time, transmit to the speaker nonverbally that
you are paying attention to what is being said is to maintain eye contact. It is
also a friend signal that helps build stronger relational bonds. You needn’t stare
at the speaker to accomplish this; however, maintain eye contact with the
speaker about two-thirds to three-fourths of the time he or she is talking to
establish the appropriate degree of connectivity and to indicate you are tuned
into what is being said. Make a concerted eﬀort not to interrupt speakers when
they are talking. Extroverts must be particularly careful not to do this, as they
have a tendency to begin talking before the speaker is ﬁnished speaking, and,
in fact, ﬁnish what the person is saying to hurry the conversational turn-taking
process.
People like individuals who let them talk, particularly when it is about
themselves. As one unknown writer once observed, “Friends are those rare
people who ask how you are and then wait to hear the answer.” Wise counsel!
e empathic statement is the perfect tool to demonstrate that you are
listening to the other person. In order to form a good empathic statement, you
must listen to what the person is saying or take note of their emotional or
physical disposition. Paraphrasing what the person said keeps the focus on that
individual. For example, if you need help in a department store and you
observe that the salesperson looks tired, you might not get the service you
expect. To increase the probability of getting better service, you could use an
empathic statement such as: “You look like you’ve had a busy day” or “It’s been
a long day. Looks like you’re ready to go home.” ese empathic statements
demonstrate to the salesperson that you took the time to notice their personal
disposition, and more important, make them feel good about themselves.
During casual conversations, people tend not to listen to the person speaking.
