that “higher male ﬂash rates, as well as increased ﬂash intensity, have been
shown to be more attractive to females in two diﬀerent ﬁreﬂy species.”
FIREFLIES AND FRIENDS
e behavior of the ﬁreﬂy is a great metaphor for how to be more attractive to
other people and predispose them to see us as potential friends. Because people
often see you before they hear you, the nonverbal signals you send them can
inﬂuence their opinion. is is particularly true when you are meeting a
person for the ﬁrst time and that individual has no prior knowledge of you.
Like the ﬁreﬂy, you can transmit “friend” or “foe” signals to individuals around
you in an attempt to encourage or discourage interaction. Or you can “turn
your light oﬀ” and remain relatively anonymous.
Remember that in any setting where two or more strangers are in line-of-
sight proximity to each other, there is the chance that one person will observe
the other. What he or she sees will be automatically processed by the observer’s
brain for potential “friend” or “foe” signals. In most cases, that’s as far as it goes
because the person’s visual appearance is “neutral,” and the brain, assessing the
person as neither a threat nor an opportunity, chooses to dismiss it entirely.
ink of it like a person trying to hail a cab in New York City. As dozens of
cabs move along the street the individual’s attention is on the dome light atop
the taxi. If the light is oﬀ, it is quickly ignored, but if the light is on, the
person’s attention and actions are directed to that speciﬁc vehicle.
I am sure that at some point you have been a part of a group of guys or a
group of girls who have gone to a nightclub, bar, or some other public
gathering place to try to meet members of the opposite sex. Ever notice how
some people seem to attract attention while others are hardly noticed?
Sometimes it is because of diﬀerences in physical attractiveness or outward
manifestations of wealth, but, just as often, if not more often, it is because the
“popular” person is sending out “friend” signals that gets them moved from the
“neutral” (stranger) point on the friend-foe continuum toward the positive
(friend) point on the continuum, increasing the chances of social interaction.
Remember, our brains are continually scanning the environment for friend
or foe signals. People who give oﬀ foe signals are perceived as a threat to be
avoided. People who transmit friend signals are viewed as nonthreatening and
approachable. When you meet people, especially for the ﬁrst time, ensure that
you send the right nonverbal cues that allow others to see you in a positive
rather than neutral or negative light.
THE “BIG THREE” FRIEND SIGNALS
What exactly are these nonverbal friend signals you can use to enhance your
chances of other people taking positive notice of you and laying a positive
groundwork for a friendship, whether for a night or a lifetime? ere are
numerous signals to choose from, but, for our purposes, three critical cues are
essential to use if you want to encourage others to see you as a likable person
and worthy of possible friendship. ey are the “eyebrow ﬂash,” “head tilt,”
and the real, as opposed to fake, “smile” (yes, the human brain can detect the
diﬀerence!).
THE EYEBROW FLASH
e eyebrow ﬂash is a quick up-and-down movement of the eyebrows that
lasts for about one-sixth of a second and is used as a primary, nonverbal friend
signal. As individuals approach one another they eyebrow-ﬂash each other to
send the message they don’t pose a threat. Within ﬁve to six feet of meeting
someone, our brains look for this signal. If the signal is present and we
reciprocate, our nonverbal communication is telling the other person we are
not a foe to be feared or avoided. Most people do not realize that they eyebrow
ﬂash because the gesture is almost an unconscious one. Experiment for
yourself: watch individuals as they meet each other for the ﬁrst time and, if
possible, in subsequent interactions. When people greet people for the ﬁrst
time in an oﬃce or social setting, they use a verbal greeting along with the
eyebrow ﬂash. Verbal greetings could include “How are you?” “What’s up?” or
“How’s it going?” e second time people see each other, they don’t have to say
anything, but they do exchange eyebrow ﬂashes, or in the case of males, display
chin juts. A chin jut is a forward and slightly upward movement of the chin.
e next time you meet someone, pay close attention to what you do and to
