“unsafe distance” and it now poses a risk to your well-being. Here is what’s
interesting: You have been “automatically” monitoring the traﬃc behind you,
not even aware you are doing it so long as other vehicles do not penetrate your
bubble of protection. It is only when a trailing vehicle violates the boundaries
of normal following distance that you take notice.
What is true with your driving is also true with making friends. Your brain
is automatically monitoring verbal and nonverbal communication. When the
inputs are assessed as normal and nonthreatening, you respond to them
automatically; they don’t arouse suspicion or a sense of danger. is is the
reason the techniques you’ll learn in this book work; they all fall within the
human baseline. Even though you might think a person would “pick up” on
what you are doing, they won’t because the brain perceives these behaviors as
normal and, like the cars following at a safe distance, they don’t arouse
attention.
roughout this book, we will emphasize friend and foe signals. ey all
fall within the human baseline and can be used to enhance your relationships.
Each of you has the capacity to use these signals; in fact, we all have used them
during our lives. Unfortunately, many people don’t know all of the signals
available to use, and/or how to use them most eﬀectively. is is even truer
today than in the past, due to technological advances that have stiﬂed the
development of our “emotional intelligence.”
MAKING FRIENDS IN A THUMB-TALKING WORLD
I once invited two students to the front of the room at the beginning of a
lecture and had them sit face-to-face in chairs. I asked them to talk to each
other for ﬁve minutes. ey looked puzzled and asked what they should talk
about. I told them to talk about anything they wanted to. ey couldn’t come
up with a single subject! ey just sat there and stared at each other. I then
instructed them to turn their chairs back to back, and text each other about
anything. Amazingly, they had no problem conversing with each other via text
for the ﬁve minutes.
And therein lies a problem. In the days before cell phones and video games,
kids would learn basic social skills during face-to-face interactions on the
playground. ey learned all about making friends and how to deal with
conﬂict and interpersonal diﬀerences; that’s where social skills were picked up.
Along the way, kids learned how to read and transmit subtle nonverbal signals,
even if they were not consciously aware of it.
In today’s “thumb-talking” world, nobody plays ball like generations of pre–
cell phone children used to. Kids stay home and play video games and text one
another. Sure, there are some organized sports and school activities, but face-
to-face social interaction has been drastically reduced in our tech-savvy world.
at’s bad. It’s not that “tech-raised” kids lack the capacity to pick up on social
skills and signals; it’s that they don’t have enough practice to hone these skills
and become eﬀective in handling face-to-face relations.

