himself to Seagull. As the foreign diplomat reached for a can of peas, Charles
reached for the can next to it, turned to Seagull, and said, “Hi, my name is
Charles and I’m a Special Agent with the FBI.” Seagull smiled and said, “I
thought so.” From that ﬁrst innocuous meeting, Charles and Seagull developed
a close friendship. Seagull eventually agreed to assist his new FBI friend by
regularly providing him with classiﬁed information.
A casual observer, watching the many months’ wooing of Seagull, might
wonder why it took so long for the ﬁrst meeting to take place. It was not by
accident. In fact, the entire Seagull recruitment strategy was a carefully
choreographed psychological operation designed to establish a bond of
friendship between two men who would, under normal circumstances, never
contemplate such a relationship.
As a member of the FBI’s Behavioral Analysis Program, I was assigned,
along with my colleagues, the task of orchestrating the recruitment scenario for
Seagull. Our objective was to get Seagull comfortable enough with Charles,
our FBI operative, so that a ﬁrst meeting could take place and, hopefully,
would be followed by future meetings if Charles could make a good impression
on Seagull. Our task was made more diﬃcult because Seagull was a highly
trained intelligence oﬃcer who would be constantly on the alert for any person
who might arouse his suspicion, and which would result in his avoidance of
that individual at all costs.
For Charles to have a successful face-to-face ﬁrst meeting with Seagull, the
foreign operative would have to be psychologically comfortable with his
American counterpart. And for that to happen, Charles would have to take
speciﬁc steps, which, it turned out, he successfully achieved. e steps Charles
was required to follow in winning Seagull over are the same ones you must
take if you want to develop either short- or long-term friendships.
Using the Seagull case as a backdrop, let’s examine the steps Charles
successfully completed to recruit his target using the Friendship Formula.
THE FRIENDSHIP FORMULA
e Friendship Formula consists of the four basic building blocks: proximity,
frequency, duration, and intensity. ese four elements can be expressed using
the following mathematical formula:
Friendship =Proximity + Frequency + Duration + Intensity
Proximity is the distance between you and another individual and your
exposure to that individual over time. In the Seagull case, Charles didn’t
simply walk up to Seagull and introduce himself. Such behavior would have
resulted in Seagull’s rapid departure from the scene. e conditions of the case
required a more measured approach, one that allowed Seagull time to “get
used” to Charles and not view him as a threat. To achieve this end, the
friendship factor of proximity was employed. Proximity serves as an essential
element in all personal relationships. Just being in the same vicinity as your
recruitment target is critica l to the development of a personal relationship.
Proximity predisposes your recruitment target to like you and promotes
mutual attraction. People who share physical space are more likely to become
attracted to one another, even when no words are exchanged.
e key to the power of proximity is that it must take place in a
nonthreatening environment. If a person feels threatened by someone being
too close, they go “shields up” and take evasive action to move away from that
person. In the Seagull scenario, Charles was proximal to his target, but he kept
a safe distance to prevent him from perceiving Charles as a potential danger
and consequently triggering a “ﬁght or ﬂight” response.
Frequency is the number of contacts you have with another individual
over time and Duration is the length of time you spend with another
individual over time. As time passed, Charles employed the second and third
friendship factors: Frequency and Duration. He did this by positioning
himself on Seagull’s shopping route in a manner that increased the number of
instances (frequency) where the foreign diplomat saw him. After several
months, he added duration to the mix by spending longer periods of time
around Seagull. He did this by following his target into the grocery store,
thereby extending the contact tim e between them.
Intensity is how strongly you are able to satisfy another person’s
psychological and/or physical needs through the use of verbal and
nonverbal behaviors. e ﬁnal factor in the Friendship Formula, Intensity,
was achieved gradually over time as Seagull became more and more aware of
