1
THE FRIENDSHIP FORMULA
I’ve learned that people will forget what you said, people will forget what you did, but people will
never forget how you made them feel.
—MAYA ANGELOU
OPERATION SEAGULL
His code name was Seagull.
He was a highly placed foreign diplomat.
He could be a valuable asset if he became a spy for the United States.
e problem was, how do you convince somebody to pledge their
allegiance to an opposing country? e answer was to befriend Seagull and
make him an oﬀer too tempting to refuse. e key to this strategy involved
patience, painstaking intelligence gathering about every facet of Seagull’s life,
and a way to foster a relationship with an American counterpart he could trust.
A background investigation of Seagull revealed that he had been passed over
for promotion several times and was overheard telling his wife that he liked
living in America and would consider retiring there if that were possible.
Seagull was also concerned his country’s small pension would be insuﬃcient to
provide him with a comfortable retirement. Armed with this knowledge,
security analysts believed Seagull’s allegiance to his country could be
compromised if he was oﬀered the proper ﬁnancial incentives.
e challenge became how to get close enough to Seagull to make him a
ﬁnancial deal without “spooking” him. e FBI operative, Charles, was told to
slowly and systematically grow a relationship with Seagull, like aging a ﬁne
wine to bring out its best ﬂavor, to a point where the time was ripe to approach
him with an oﬀer. e agent was told if he moved too fast it was likely that
Seagull would go “shields up” and avoid him completely. Instead, he was
instructed to orchestrate his approach, using behavioral strategies designed to
establish friendships. e ﬁrst step was to get Seagull to like Charles before
they exchanged a single word. e second step was to use the appropriate
verbal prompts to translate that goodwill into a lasting friendship.
e preparation for the critica l ﬁrst encounter with Seagull started many
months before the actual meeting took place. Surveillance had determined that
Seagull routinely left his embassy compound once a week and walked two
blocks to the corner grocery store to shop. Armed with this information,
Charles was instructed to station himself at various locations along Seagull’s
route to the store. He was warned never to approach Seagull or threaten him in
any way; instead he was to simply “be there” so Seagull could see him.
As a trained intelligence oﬃcer, it was not long before Seagull took notice of
the FBI agent, who, by the way, made no eﬀort to conceal his identity. Because
Charles made no move to intercept or speak with his target, Seagull did not
feel threatened and became accustomed to seeing the American on his trips to
the store.
After several weeks of being in the same vicinity together, Seagull made eye
contact with the American operative. Charles nodded his head, acknowledging
Seagull’s presence, but showed no further interest in him.
More weeks passed and, as they did, Charles increased his nonverbal
interaction with Seagull by increasing his eye contact, raising his eyebrows,
tilting his head, and jutting out his chin, which are all nonverbal signs that
scientists have discovered are interpreted by the human brain as “friend
signals.”
Two months elapsed before Charles made his next move. He followed
Seagull into the grocery store he routinely visited, but kept his distance from
the foreign diplomat. With each new trip to the store, Charles continued to
enter the grocery as well, still maintaining space between himself and Seagull
but increasing the number of times he passed the diplomat in the aisles and
increasing the duration of visual contact with him. He noted that Seagull
bought a can of peas on each of his shopping excursions. With this new
information, Charles waited a few additional weeks and then, on one occasion,
followed Seagull into the store as he usually did, but this time to introduce
