It is amazing how easy it is to inﬂuence people’s behavior using these
friendship tools. Alone or in combination, they allow you to make people feel
better about themselves and, in turn, encourage them to make you feel better
as well. When you employ the Golden Rule of Friendship, it encourages
reciprocity: “If you make me happy, I want to make you happy.” Even in
onetime encounters, when you are interacting with a person you will probably
never see again, you can witness this reciprocity in action.
THE CHOICE BETWEEN FLYING FIRST CLASS OR BEING GROUNDE D FOR
BEING GRUMPY
Several years ago, I had a layover in Frankfurt, Germany. I wasn’t looking
forward to the rest of my ﬂight; I had the middle seat in coach and the
scheduled ﬂying time was eight hours. I certainly didn’t want to board early,
and with an hour to spare, I decided to put the time to good use. I pulled up
every German word I could remember from my high school language class and
walked over to the ticket agent. As I approached, I gave the major friend
signals, the eyebrow ﬂash, the smile, the head tilt. When I got to the counter, I
said “Guten tag . . .” so we would have some “common ground” (see Chapter
4). He smiled at my amateur attempt to speak the language but returned the
greeting, and then said in English, “Can I help you?”
I answered no but began to engage him in conversation. I used empathic
statements to encourage him to speak and to make him feel good about
himself. As the conversation progressed, spurred on by my brief empathic
comments, he was doing almost all of the talking. He didn’t notice this because
people see the world as revolving around them and thus my behavior did not
stray outside the human baseline and cause an “alert” reaction in his brain. I
gave him an excuse to talk; in fact, I encouraged it and it made him feel good.
So now he likes me.
At the end of our “conversation,” the agent asked me why I didn’t board the
plane. I told him that I had a middle seat and I wanted to spend as little time
as possible jammed in there. at was it.
About twenty minutes later, the ticket agent made a ﬁnal boarding call. As I
walked to the air bridge, I heard the agent call out, “Herr Schafer.” I stopped
and the agent walked over to me. He asked if I had my boarding pass. I
nodded and showed it to him. He took it and handed me a diﬀerent pass.
“Enjoy your ﬂight, Herr Schafer,” he said.
I looked at the document and recognized I had been upgraded to a seat in
business class. I said, “ank you, sir, I really appreciate that.”
“No problem, don’t worry about it,” he replied and waved me toward the
plane.
•  •  •
Another time my plane was late and people were really angry. I was waiting in
line at the boarding counter and the guy in front of me was so worked up he
was yelling at the agent about how he was going to miss his connecting ﬂight
and yada, yada, yada. She told him there was nothing she could do but put
him on the later ﬂight that left at 5:30 p .m.
en it was my turn. I walked up to the obviously ﬂustered employee and
didn’t expect anything; I was only trying to make the agent’s day better. She
took the ticket I handed her and said, “Sorry, sir, you’re going to miss your
connecting ﬂight. I can book you on a later plane leaving at ﬁve thirty p.m.”
I looked her directly in the eyes and said wryly, “I don’t think that’s
acceptable,” mimicking the previous passenger. And as she looked back at me I
added, “Can I yell at you now?” And she said no and mentioned the 5:30 p.m.
ﬂight again.
I repeated, “Can I yell at you now?” at’s when she started giggling. I said,
“When can I start yelling at you?” Both of us were now grinning and bantering
back and forth. After about a minute of this she said, “You know what . . . I
just found a seat on the two forty p.m. ﬂight,” and typed my name into the
computer. I commented, “I’m just curious, I overheard you tell the previous
customer that there were no seats available on the two forty p.m. ﬂight.”
“ere are no seats for people who yell at me. Do you want to yell at me now?”
she said. “No, ma’am,” I sheepishly replied. “ank you.”
e interesting thing is I didn’t walk up to the agent with the idea of getting
an earlier ﬂight; I just wanted to make her feel better. But when you make
other people feel good, good things often end up happening to you.
•  •  •
