2. All mobile communication device users should refrain from speaking on their phones in any
public or private location where vocalizations would be distracting and/or inappropriate.
(Example: I didn’t go out for a relaxing meal at a nice restaurant to hear your long-winded
discourse about problems at home or work.)
3. Smartphones can be hacked. Pictures and other information you would not want to see
reprinted in your local newspaper would best be removed from the device.
4. Most cell phone bills provide a detailed history of calls to and from your device. If you would
prefer that others not know who you called and who called you, it might be wise to keep this
in mind.
5. Recording yourself doing things which, for lack of a better word, might be deemed
inappropriate by others is probably not a good idea. Case in point: A woman from the United
Kingdom picked up her boyfriend’s smartphone and found images of him having sex with a
dog. To make matters worse, it was her dog! How the woman reacted to this chain of events
was not reported.
6. “Sexting”—particularly when pictures are included—is just not a good idea, even between
husband and wife. ese photos have a nasty way of suddenly appearing on social media
websites, particularly if the husband and wife get divorced and one or both of them are
vindictive.
7. Don’t Let V/R (Virtual Reality) trump R/W (Real World) relationships. Individuals vary in
their tolerance of cell phone conversations (and constantly checking social media) undertaken
by someone they are with. Even if your companion (date, friend, or business associate) is more
tech-savvy and tolerant than most, it is still considered inappropriate for you to be taking calls,
checking messages, and frequently glancing over at your cell during your time together. In an
earlier chapter on verbal communication, I pointed out how important it was to listen in a
focused manner to the person you are talking with. It shows interest and respect, fostering a
superior environment for making people like you and keeping friends. If you insist on seeing
your phone as an umbilical cord in the presence of others, don’t expect the birth of a good
relationship.
8. Because cell phones retain their initial area code (regardless of where they are used) and,
further, because transmission of cell phone conversations is not always clear, it is important
when you leave your number for a callback that you start with the area code and repeat the
entire number twice. at way, you increase your chances that the recipient of your message
will have the information necessary to get back to you.
Electronic Messages (Email)
1. Emails fall somewhere between text messages and letters when it comes to how formal or
informal your communication can be. Obviously, emails to prospective employers or
important business contacts should be more reﬂective of a traditional letter, well thought out,
and grammatically sound. at being said, it is advisable to keep all emails free of the type of
abbreviations normally used in texting, and check for spelling mistakes before transmitting
your messages.
2. Carefully consider your screen name when using email communications. A screen name that
might be acceptable for communications between friends could be wildly inappropriate if used
when contacting prospective employers or your kid’s school oﬃcial. One of my colleagues who
teaches human resource management in a business school showed me her “Inappropriate
Screen Name Hall of Fame” list, which included names actually used by her students in
applying for jobs. Number one on the list was “Lickmered.”
3. Don’t write email text in capital letters (LIKE THIS). It is considered to be the equivalent of
shouting at someone in verbal interactions and is viewed as rude.
4. Never write an email when you are extremely angry or distraught. In an earlier chapter, I
emphasized that people who are agitated in such a manner have diﬃculty thinking rationally.
An email written during these times often reﬂects this damaged thought process. If you must
write such a message, don’t send it; not immediately, anyway. Put it aside for several hours and
then reread it when you have calmed down and you can think more rationally. Only then
should you consider sending it . . . probably with signiﬁcant revisions. Another good reason
not to immediately send out an angry email is its potential to further escalate the situation. e
problem might be resolved (or go away) within a few hours if “left alone.” A hasty, angry
response eﬀectively eliminates this possibility.
5. When you are ready to send an email be sure to check to whom it is being sent. Many
embarrassing incidents could have been avoided if the email sender had made sure his or her
message was being sent to a speciﬁc person and not “reply all.”
6. An email can be “forever” (or at least linger in cyberspace for months, even years). Once an
email is “out there” it can take on a life of its own: reproduced, forwarded, archived. Each time
you write an email you should ask yourself: “What if this email went public and stayed public
for a signiﬁcant period of time: would I still send it?”
7. Deleted emails can still be recovered for months after you have “erased” them. is is because
many Internet servers “save” deleted emails on their computers. e recovery of supposedly
“deleted” emails has revealed sensitive information about (or from) individuals they thought
was safely destroyed. Oftentimes, these persons discovered this unsettling news in open court.
8. Never open an email attachment unless you are sure you know who sent it and that they, in
fact, were the senders. (Email addresses are sometimes illegally accessed from a person’s
computer and then used to send messages containing viruses to everyone on that person’s
contact list. It appears that the message is legitimate because it is sent from the compromised
person’s computer.) In general, it is best not to open any email attachments unless absolutely
necessary. Protecting your computer with security programs that screen attachments (for
example, Norton or McAfee) is advised; otherwise, opening attachments on your computer is
akin to having unprotected sex.
Social Sites (Facebook, Twitter, Tumblr, etc.)
1. Social sites vary in their ﬁltering mechanisms: who can and cannot see your postings. Be sure
you are familiar with these ﬁlters and use them appropriately.
2. Assume that anything you post on a social site can be accessed and reproduced for others to see.
Further, keep in mind that those college parties where you were photographed drinking and
having a “good old time” might someday be accessed by a prospective employer, potential (or
actual) spouse, or even your parents and in-laws!
3. As a general rule, it is wise to limit your digital footprint online. Excessive use of social sites
enlarges that footprint and might cause problems down the road.
4. Be careful who you friend!
