Screen Name Hall of Fame” list, which included names actually used by her students in
applying for jobs. Number one on the list was “Lickmered.”
3. Don’t write email text in capital letters (LIKE THIS). It is considered to be the equivalent of
shouting at someone in verbal interactions and is viewed as rude.
4. Never write an email when you are extremely angry or distraught. In an earlier chapter, I
emphasized that people who are agitated in such a manner have diﬃculty thinking rationally.
An email written during these times often reﬂects this damaged thought process. If you must
write such a message, don’t send it; not immediately, anyway. Put it aside for several hours and
then reread it when you have calmed down and you can think more rationally. Only then
should you consider sending it . . . probably with signiﬁcant revisions. Another good reason
not to immediately send out an angry email is its potential to further escalate the situation. e
problem might be resolved (or go away) within a few hours if “left alone.” A hasty, angry
response eﬀectively eliminates this possibility.
5. When you are ready to send an email be sure to check to whom it is being sent. Many
embarrassing incidents could have been avoided if the email sender had made sure his or her
message was being sent to a speciﬁc person and not “reply all.”
6. An email can be “forever” (or at least linger in cyberspace for months, even years). Once an
email is “out there” it can take on a life of its own: reproduced, forwarded, archived. Each time
you write an email you should ask yourself: “What if this email went public and stayed public
for a signiﬁcant period of time: would I still send it?”
7. Deleted emails can still be recovered for months after you have “erased” them. is is because
many Internet servers “save” deleted emails on their computers. e recovery of supposedly
“deleted” emails has revealed sensitive information about (or from) individuals they thought
was safely destroyed. Oftentimes, these persons discovered this unsettling news in open court.
8. Never open an email attachment unless you are sure you know who sent it and that they, in
fact, were the senders. (Email addresses are sometimes illegally accessed from a person’s
computer and then used to send messages containing viruses to everyone on that person’s
contact list. It appears that the message is legitimate because it is sent from the compromised
person’s computer.) In general, it is best not to open any email attachments unless absolutely
necessary. Protecting your computer with security programs that screen attachments (for
example, Norton or McAfee) is advised; otherwise, opening attachments on your computer is
akin to having unprotected sex.
Social Sites (Facebook, Twitter, Tumblr, etc.)
1. Social sites vary in their ﬁltering mechanisms: who can and cannot see your postings. Be sure
you are familiar with these ﬁlters and use them appropriately.
2. Assume that anything you post on a social site can be accessed and reproduced for others to see.
Further, keep in mind that those college parties where you were photographed drinking and
having a “good old time” might someday be accessed by a prospective employer, potential (or
actual) spouse, or even your parents and in-laws!
3. As a general rule, it is wise to limit your digital footprint online. Excessive use of social sites
enlarges that footprint and might cause problems down the road.
4. Be careful who you friend!
DIGITAL DETECTIVES
As you know by now, I am a frequent ﬂyer. This time, I approached the gate at the Nashville airport to see if I
could ﬂy standby on an earlier ﬂight, but this story is not about me getting an upgrade. The gate clerks, a man
and a woman, were intently examining a very expensive digital camera. I heard them comment to each other,
“There’s no name on the camera or any other unique identifying information. We have to ﬁnd out who this
camera belongs to and give it back to them.” I asked them what they were doing.” In unison they said, “We’re
the FBI agents of American Airlines.” I told them I was a real FBI agent, although I was retired. I asked them
how they could ﬁnd the owner of the camera without any clues. The man explained that they would turn the
camera on and look for clues in the pictures the owner took. I was intrigued as I saw them go through the
process of solving the digital puzzle. As they shufﬂed through the date-stamped pictures, they gathered digital
clues. The owner was a male of Hispanic descent. It appeared that he had spent three days in Las Vegas,
probably on business, because there were no family pictures. He stayed at the Bellagio Hotel. They continued to
scroll through the pictures. The woman high-ﬁved the man and shrieked, “I found it!” She showed me the
picture on the camera that was taken the previous week. The photo depicted a newer, wood-frame house with
blue siding. I saw the picture, but I didn’t see what triggered their excitement. She pointed to the house and
said, “Those kinds of houses are typically built on the East Coast in mid-Atlantic states.” “Okay,” I thought, “so
what?” She then directed me to the barely visible “For Sale” sign in the front yard. “Okay,” I said, not sure of
the signiﬁcance of the sign. She used the camera’s zoom feature to make the address and telephone number of
the real estate agency clearly visible. The real estate ofﬁce was in Columbia, South Carolina. I ﬁnally got it. I
blurted out loud, “The owner of the camera was probably from Columbia, South Carolina, because people
typically don’t take pictures of houses for sale unless they are considering a purchase.” The woman added, “An
earlier ﬂight we boarded was headed to Columbia, South Carolina.” She pulled up the passenger list and,
fortunately, there were only a few Hispanic names listed. I had to board my ﬂight, but I was conﬁdent that the
FBI agents of American Airlines would locate the owner and return the camera. I was amazed by how easy it
was to track the movements of the owner of the lost camera using a few abstract digital clues. I was even more
amazed that they went the extra mile to return the lost camera. They said they returned many lost or forgotten
electronic devices using similar methods. The point of the story is that in a digital world, it’s hard to remain
anonymous. Keep this in mind the next time you post something on the Internet or do something as benign as
taking a digital photograph.
CATPHISH OR CAVIAR: WHAT YOU NEED TO KNOW BEFORE DEVELOPING
ONLINE RELATIONSHIPS
e Internet provides a fertile environment for growing friendships and even
lifelong liaisons between individuals. is has led to the development of
websites that facilitate the online “dating” process and make it easier for
individuals interested in ﬁnding signiﬁcant others to “hook up.” e people
who own these websites claim great success in getting “soul mates” together:
providing the mechanism through which people meet online and, eventually,
establish long-term commitments in the real world.
