e old saying “one man’s ﬂoor is another man’s ceiling” is applicable to this
particular foe signal (or cluster of signals). For example, if you’re sporting a
leather jacket with a skull and crossbones, have numerous tattoos on your
arms, and are wearing a spike necklace, it might be interpreted by someone
who doesn’t know you as a person to avoid at all costs. In that sense, your
appearance is a foe signal. On the other hand, if you happen to be at a death
metal concert, the same outﬁt might be seen as a friend signal worthy of
notice. us you will need to determine, using common sense, whether the
way you are clothed and accessorized will likely be perceived as a friend or foe
signal by a person you might want to approach. Just because someone is
dressed diﬀerently than you doesn’t guarantee that your appearance will
automatically be a “turnoﬀ,” but the adage “birds of a feather ﬂock together”
should be considered when it comes to interactions between individuals with
signiﬁcantly diﬀerent ways of adorning their bodies.
My son, Bradley, inadvertently taught me a valuable lesson about assessing
people by the clothes they wear. In high school, he went through a phase where
he was all about men’s fashion, which included spending every penny he
earned at his part-time job after school on clothes and accessories. I
accompanied Bradley to the shopping mall one day to buy a wallet. He looked
at the most expensive wallets in an exclusive clothier shop. e one he bought
cost $150. I was shocked. I pulled out my three-fold wallet and reminded him
that my wallet only cost about $20 including tax. “No, Dad,” he replied. “It’s
the details that make the diﬀerence. You can wear expensive clothes and shoes
but people will know you are a ‘poser’ if you pull out a twenty-dollar, three-
fold wallet.” My son eventually passed through that phase in his life and is
back to wearing faded blue jeans and sweatshirts, but I still carry the lesson he
taught me.
From that day forward I paid closer attention to the details. I look at stitch
count in shirts. e more stitches per inch, the higher the quality of the shirt.
Four-millimeter buttons are sewn on higher-quality shirts. If a man wears an
expensive suit and a cheap watch, he is pretending to be someone he is not.
Unshined shoes are another sign of a poser. People who engage in perception
management often overlook the details, a tell that exposes who they really are.
WHO WAS THAT MASKED MAN?
Although it is usually worn by individuals who require it due to a medical condition, a face mask, particularly
the “surgical” kind that covers the mouth and nose of the user, acts as a foe signal even when that is not its
intended purpose.
A masked individual sends out such a powerful foe signal that one person I know used it to increase the
space around him on the notoriously crowded commuter trains that service the New York City area. His modus
operandi was to occupy the window seat where the aisle seat next to him was open. Then, when anyone
approached the unoccupied seat, he would turn his head so that his masked mouth and nose were clearly
visible. Many times the seat remained open until all other available seats in the car were taken.
And he didn’t stop there. If someone did sit next to him, he would begin to twitch and mutter under his
breath. This was usually sufﬁcient to dislodge the newly arrived seatmate. If that didn’t work, he would reach in
his pocket, pull out a pill bottle that obviously was issued from a drugstore, take out a pill, lift up his mask,
and pop the pill in his mouth. Very few people can sit through such an experience and remain in place.
It turns out that karma has its moments. On one particular trip, the masked individual glanced up at a man
moving toward him in the aisle, shifted in his seat to be sure the stranger saw the white surgical mask on his
face, and then turned back to the window. A moment later, he caught a glimpse of the stranger sitting down
next to him. So he went into his twitch-and-mutter scenario. The stranger remained rooted in his chair. Finally,
the masked passenger took out his trusty pill bottle and went through his pill-taking routine. The person next to
him remained, without unmoving.
The masked passenger couldn’t believe his ruse had failed. He turned his head to see what kind of person
could remain in such a threatening environment. What he saw was a seatmate who was now also wearing a
face mask, twitching, and holding a prescription bottle in his hand! That was all he needed to see. Without any
hesitation, he bolted from his window seat and moved down the aisle into the next passenger car.
TERRITORIAL (PERSONAL SPACE) INVASION
ere seem to be deﬁnite consistencies in the ways humans govern the space
around them, that is, the manner in which they regulate the distance between
themselves and other people. e term for such spatial regulation is
territoriality, and the territorial imperative is practiced by humans and lower
animals alike. e underlying principle of territoriality is that many species of
life desire and attempt to maintain a speciﬁed amount and quality of space for
themselves. If you don’t believe that the territorial imperative exists, get on a
bus or subway car occupied by only one other passenger and plop yourself
down next to him. In some instances, people will tolerate an invasion of their
personal space if the invasion occurs in a side-by-side encounter such as in
crowded elevators or at sporting events.
“Invading” another person’s territory—whether through intrusive eye
contact or actual physical closeness—is a powerful foe signal.
