the probability of deception increases. e following exchange between a dad
and his son demonstrates the Why Should I Believe You technique.
DAD: ere was ten dollars on my dresser this morning. It’s no longer there. Did you take
money from my dresser for any reason?
SON: No.
DAD: Son, I want to believe you. But I’m having a hard time. Tell me. Why should I believe
you?
SON: I’m not a thief.
DAD: I didn’t ask you if you were a thief or not. I asked you why I should believe you. Why
should I believe you?
SON: Because I didn’t steal the money. I’m telling you the truth.
DAD: I know you are and I believe you.
In this exchange, the son responded that he was not a thief. is response
did not answer the question “Why should I believe you?” Dad gave his son a
second chance by telling him that the question was not whether he was a thief
but rather “Why should I believe you?” is time the son answered, “Because I
didn’t steal the money. I’m telling you the truth,” which indicates the son was
probably telling the truth. e fact that the son correctly answered the
question “Why should I believe you” does not mean he told the truth, but it
does decrease the likelihood of deception.
When you communicate with people, especially on the Internet by instant
messaging or by texting on a smartphone, use these simple, noninvasive
techniques to test the person’s veracity. ese techniques are so subtle that the
people you are communicating with will not even recognize that they are being
tested for veracity. Although these techniques are only indicators of deception,
not proof of deception, they do provide you with a strong line of defense
against online predators.
DETECTING DECEPTION IN ONLINE PROF ILES
Most people do not accurately describe themselves in online proﬁles, especially
dating proﬁles. Researchers Toma, Hancock, and Ellison surveyed eighty
people who submitted online proﬁles to various dating websites. An
astounding 81 percent of the online daters lied about one or more of their
physical attributes, which included height, weight, and age. Women tended to
lie about their weight and men tended to lie about their height. Women whose
weight scored further from the mean lied more about their degree of obesity.
Likewise, men whose height scored further from the mean lied more about
how tall they were. e survey respondents reported that they were more likely
to lie about their photographs than in relationship information such as marital
status and the number of children they have.
In a follow-up study by Hancock and Toma, they found that about one-
third of the online photographs examined were not accurate. Women’s
photographs were judged as less accurate than men’s photographs. Women
were more likely to be older than they were portrayed in their photographs.
eir photographs were more likely to be Photoshopped or taken by
professional photographers. Additionally, less attractive people were more likely
to enhance their proﬁle. e most interesting ﬁnding was that although people
frequently lied in their online proﬁles, they attempted to keep their alterations
within believable parameters in the event they met their correspondents in
subsequent face-to-face meetings.
e magnitude of deception in online proﬁles should not come as a big
surprise. An online proﬁle is the equivalent of a ﬁrst date. Anyone who has
been on a ﬁrst date will remember putting his or her best foot forward. (Just as
in a ﬁrst job interview, we wear our “interview” suit.) Women dressed with
great contemplation and took extra minutes to put on their makeup. Men
ensured their clothes were color- coordinated and wrinkle-free. Conversations
were rehearsed before any words were exchanged. Personality ﬂaws and
behavioral quirks were carefully camouﬂaged with polite talk and impeccable
manners. e extra steps were taken to make the right ﬁrst impression.
Putting your best foot forward when meeting someone is not construed as
deception because the foot put forward still is recognizably yours, albeit an
enhanced version. People who present themselves on the Internet should try to
put a positive face on their proﬁle, but remain within the bounds of truth
when including a photograph and a description of who they are. Likewise,
people who use the Internet to search for potential relationships should learn
to take online proﬁles with a grain of salt, recognizing that the person they are
scrutinizing is never going to appear more attractive or qualiﬁed than the
picture and résumé they post.
