oﬀensive, sometimes even more oﬀensive than the physical invasion of
personal space. In some cases, the behavior can also be viewed as threatening
and/or aggressive, causing a defensive response from the person being looked
at. In contrast, a head-to-toe gaze will be accepted or even be seen as
complimentary in a close, established relationship.
THE BOYFRIEND BODY SCAN
Long before the tolerated but unpleasant full body scans became a necessity at
airports around the world, they were being done by individuals using “elevator
eyes” to size up persons of interest. I routinely used the full body scan when
my daughter’s boyfriends would appear at the front door. I would open the
door, stare deeply into the suitor’s eyes, and very slowly scan his body from
head to toe. I would ﬁnish my introduction with a stern, “What do you want?”
e young man would stammer and stutter to ﬁnd words to say. I knew then
that my message was received loud and clear. at nonverbal message was
more eﬀective than any verbal threats I could have issued.
UNCOVERED
During my post-FBI career, I trained undercover police oﬃcers in how to
behave during operations to avoid being identiﬁed. Eye gaze is one of the
nonverbal cues that exposes undercover oﬃcers. As stated earlier, people have
to earn the right to enter your personal space physically or with their eyes.
Police oﬃcers, by virtue of their authority, have the right to look into places
and at people in a way normal people can’t. Have you ever been stopped in
traﬃc at a red light next to a police car? You take sneak peeks into the oﬃcer’s
car. If the oﬃcer happens to turn and meet your gaze, you quickly break eye
contact and look forward again. e opposite is not true. If the police oﬃcer
looks into your car and you meet his gaze, he does not break eye contact, he
just continues to look. You would likely be the one who quickly breaks eye
contact and hope he doesn’t ﬁnd a reason to stop you. e police oﬃcer has
the right to look at you and into your car by virtue of his authority; you can’t
do the same thing without risking social repercussions.
e freedom to look in forbidden spaces is one of the most common
nonverbal “tells” that expose undercover oﬃcers. For example, an undercover
oﬃcer is assigned to go to a bar where known drug dealers hang out, to make
friends with them and buy drugs. When the undercover oﬃcer walks into the
bar for the ﬁrst time, he will, out of habit, pause for a moment, make a slow
scan of the room looking for possible threats, walk to the bar, and order a
drink. e undercover oﬃcer feels comfortable invading other people’s space
with his eyes (making direct eye contact) because of his authority as a law
enforcement oﬃcer. e problem is that normal people don’t act this way
when they enter a bar for the ﬁrst time, especially a shady establishment.
When people enter a bar for the ﬁrst time, they typically walk directly to the
bar or a table and sit down without making direct eye contact with anyone.
Once they are seated and have a drink in hand, they then are permitted to take
furtive looks around the bar. Conversely, people who routinely frequent the bar
have earned the right to invade personal space and are permitted to look
around the bar for friends when they enter. is nonverbal tell, albeit subtle, is
easily picked up by criminals, who, for fear of getting caught, are very adept at
reading people.
An eye roll
