feel good about themselves, they will like you. us, asking someone to do you
a favor is not all about you. It is also about the person doing you the favor.
A warning, however: Do not overuse this technique, because Ben Franklin
also observed that “guests, like ﬁsh, begin to smell after three days.” (As do
people who ask too many favors!)
Returning to Ben’s encounter with Vicki, he can use this “ask a favor”
technique during his conversation with the young woman.
BEN: It takes a lot of dedication and determination to commit to a project of that magnitude.
(allowing Vicki to compliment herself)
VICKI: Yeah. (thinking) I sure am dedicated and determined. I sacriﬁced a lot to get that mega-
project done and I did a very good job if I may say so myself.
BEN: Vicki, could you do me a favor and watch my drink while I go to the bathroom? (asks for
a favor)
VICKI: Sure, no problem.
Ben addressed Vicki by her ﬁrst name (recall that people like the sound of
their name and the fact that someone remembers it) and then asked her to do
him a small favor. ese small behaviors predispose Vicki to like Ben because
people who do favors for others feel good about themselves.
COMBINING FRIENDSHIP TOOLS TO ENHANCE RELATIONSHIP
EFFECTIVENESS
Depending on the circumstances, you might ﬁnd yourself using one or a
combination of several techniques presented in this book to make a new
friend. e advantage of using several techniques together is the additional
friend-making power such combined techniques provide. To illustrate,
consider how using the primacy eﬀect, Friendship Formula, and third-party
introduction helped our military forces make friends out of people that might
well be predisposed to be wary or downright hostile toward Americans.
Winning over the hearts and minds of civilians when you are a foreigner
conducting military operations in their country can be a daunting assignment.
Combat soldiers on foreign soil, by the very nature of their work, are forced to
adopt a strategy voiced by General James “Mad Dog” Mattis, who said, “Be
polite, be professional, but have a plan to kill everybody you meet.” In other
words, making friends out of potential enemies can be a trying task.
In an attempt to win over the Afghan people, I was a member of a team
that was asked to “show our guys [American forces] how to be less threatening
yet, at the same time, maintain their battleﬁeld awareness.”
So how do you go about making someone appear friendly when everything
they wear appears threatening (battle gear, helmets, gun belts) and they are
taught to scowl (their “game face”) when dealing with the local populace? It’s
no wonder that when these soldiers come into a local village the native
population takes one look, sees foe signals, and goes shields up.
is is what we told the military to do: Go into the villages with the same
battle gear and a readiness to defend yourself if attacked but also do the
following:
1. Employ the Friendship Formula: Spend some time in the village without really doing
anything . . . just be there. is satisﬁes the condition of proximity. en, over time, increase
the number (frequency) of visits to the village and the amount of time (duration) spent there.
Finally, add intensity to the mix by giving the children of the village things they like (more on
this in a moment).
2. Send out “friend” rather than “foe” signals: Keep your game face but put a mask over it; in other
words, smile, don’t scowl.
3. Once the villagers are used to seeing you acting in a nonthreatening way, load up a truck with
soccer balls and drive into the village where the children can see you. What will happen? Because
you’re sending out friend signals, the children won’t see you as a threat and, further, their
curiosity will be aroused (intensity) and they’ll approach the truck and ask, “Who are those
balls all for?” e driver of the truck can tell the children, “ey’re for you!” en give them
away.
So, what happens? e kids like you. So when they see their parents, the
kids serve as a third-party introduction on behalf of the Americans. ey say,
“I saw the Americans, they gave us soccer balls, and they are nice people.” So
now the parents see you through the primacy ﬁlter created by their children
and they are more open to seeing you as a friend rather than as “the enemy.”
If the Americans had simply come into the village without employing the
Friendship Formula (no attempt to establish proximity, frequency, duration,
and intensity), sending foe rather than friend signals and not using the primacy
eﬀect through third-party introductions, what do you think would have
happened when the American forces told the village elders they weren’t a
threat? e Americans simply wouldn’t have been believed. e soldiers would
have been perceived as liars.
