TAKING THE PRIMACY EFFECT TO THE BANK
I often employed the primacy eﬀect during interrogations of people suspected
of committing crimes. I remember one case where we were interviewing a
possible bank robber. ere were two of us and the suspect sitting in the
interrogation room. Early in the interview, my partner excused himself, saying
he had to make a telephone call. Actually, his departure was part of our plan
that allowed me to be alone with the suspect so I could speak with him
privately.
I told the suspect, “You’re lucky to have my partner on the job. He’s honest
and fair. He’ll listen without prejudice to your side of the story.” en I sat
back, waiting for my partner to return. A few moments later, before he actually
returned, I added, “e thing about my partner—I guess he can aﬀord to be
fair. e guy’s a human lie detector. I don’t know how he does it, but he knows
when someone is lying. No matter what the subject is or who is talking, the
man can tell if someone is being dishonest.” What I did through my last
comment was to create a ﬁlter through which I wanted the suspect to view my
partner. I employed the primacy eﬀect to shape his assessment of my partner’s
skills.
When my partner returned to the room, he already knew that he was to
remain silent until I asked the suspect, “Did you rob the bank?” If the man
said, “No,” my partner was instructed to look at the suspect like “You’ve got to
be kidding” and give him a skeptical look.
So, what happened? I asked the guy, “Did you rob the bank?” and he said,
“No.” My partner responded by saying, “What?” with a skeptical look. And—
this is the truth—the suspect took his hand, slapped it on the table, and said,
“Damn, he’s good!” and went on to confess to the crime.
BEWARE OF THE PRIMACY EFFECT IN BIASING YOUR OWN BEHAVIOR
Using the primacy eﬀect is a great idea when you’re using it to inﬂuence others,
but be aware that it can cut both ways. If you’re not careful, the primacy eﬀect
can cause you to be prejudicial in your own behavior toward others, leading to
inaccurate and misleading beliefs about their behavior.
In my early days as an FBI agent, I fell victim to the primacy eﬀect. I was
given the task of interviewing a suspect who, my colleague informed me, had
kidnapped a four-year-old girl. Before talking to the suspect, my thoughts were
already ﬁltered through my colleague’s statement, and by the time I actually
met the man, I had already made up my mind that he was the kidnapper.
Consequently, everything the suspect said or did I viewed through my “ﬁlter”
as an indication of guilt . . . d espite ample evidence to the contrary.
e more pressure I put on the suspect, the more nervous he became, not
because he was guilty, but because I did not believe him and he thought he
would go to prison for something he didn’t do. e more nervous the suspect
became, the more it reinforced my initial belief that he was the kidnapper, and
the more pressure I applied. It was no surprise that the interview spiraled out
of control. In the end, I was embarrassed when the real kidnapper was caught.
e next time you conduct an interview, meet a new colleague, or buy a
new product, think about how you came to form your opinion about that
person or product. Chances are high that your opinions were formed by
primacy.
e acceptance of employees who transfer from one oﬃce to another often
depends on the reputation that precedes their arrival . . . just as you are
convinced that the new brand of toothpaste you purchased has to be good
because four out of ﬁve dentists recommended it.
e primacy eﬀect is powerful. Use it wisely.
ASKING A FAVOR
Good old Ben Franklin, the guy on the hundred-dollar bill, observed that if he
asked a colleague for a favor, the colleague liked him more than if he hadn’t
made the request. is phenomenon became known as (no surprise here) the
Ben Franklin eﬀect.
At ﬁrst glance, this ﬁnding seems counterintuitive. Shouldn’t you like the
person more for doing you the favor than the other way around? It turns out,
such is not the case. When a person does someone a favor, they feel good about
themselves. e Golden Rule of Friendship states that if you make a person
