when people hold two opposing ideas or beliefs. is real or perceived
diﬀerence creates anxiety.
People holding similar views reinforce one another and thereby enhance the
likelihood of mutual attraction. Similarity also increases the probability that
like-minded individuals will meet again. Mutual reinforcement maintains or
elevates self-esteem, which leads to a greater sense of well-being and happiness.
People who share the same principles and beliefs rarely experience
dissonance and feel secure in the sameness they share with each other. ese
individuals tend to experience less conﬂict because they perceive the world in
similar ways. Sameness leads to the perception of greater happiness and a
feeling of being understood. When people ﬁrst meet, even the perception of
sameness will increase mutual attraction.
CUT FROM THE SAME CLOTH
Early in my career, I noticed that most FBI agents looked alike and shared the
same views. is can be explained by the psychological principle of similarity
and attraction. FBI agents sitting on hiring boards tended to hire new agents
who were most like themselves. When the newly hired agents gained enough
seniority to participate in the hiring process, they also unconsciously selected
individuals who were most like them. Over the decades, the FBI became
populated by agents who shared the same views, dressed alike, and looked
alike.
With the advent of aﬃrmative action, more women and minorities were
included in the FBI ranks. When these individuals gained seniority and sat on
hiring boards, they tended to select applicants who were most like themselves.
Based on the psychological principle of similarity and attraction, current FBI
agents as well as most U.S. businesses more closely reﬂect the diversity of the
American population today.
Commonalities connect people. Finding common ground quickly
establishes rapport and a fertile environment for developing friendships.
Aristotle wrote, “We like those who resemble us, and are engaged in the same
pursuits. . . . We like those who desire the same things as we [do].” Developing
relationships is easy if you can ﬁnd common ground with another person.
People automatically think that other people think like they do, especially
when meeting an individual for the ﬁrst time. us when you ﬁrst meet
another individual, you can build on this predisposition by seeking things you
have in common.
When assessing someone from a distance, look for potential commonalities.
ese can be found, for example, in the way people dress. An individual
wearing a shirt embossed with a sports team logo suggests that he or she has at
least a passing interest in the team. Even if you don’t favor the same team, you
can use the information to start a conversation, particularly if you have any
interest in sports.
What a person is doing can also serve as a basis for establishing common
ground. If a person is walking a dog, reading a book, or pushing a baby
carriage it provides you with valuable information for identifying potential
conversation openers and/or similar interests.
Tattoos can also provide clues to people’s interests. Tattoos are permanent.
Most of the time when people get one, they put some thought into the type of
tattoo they want and where it should be placed on their bodies. A small tattoo
of a marijuana leaf placed on a prominent part of a person’s body projects a
strongly held attitude. If you are strongly opposed to the use of weed, it might
be best to look elsewhere for a friend who shares more compatible beliefs.
e way a person interacts with others can also provide clues to their
personal disposition. A person who slumps in a chair and does not easily
interact with others has a diﬀerent disposition than someone who sits upright
and easily engages those around them. If your personality diﬀers signiﬁcantly
from the person across from you, the probability of developing a close
relationship signiﬁcantly diminishes.
After you make initial contact with a person, listening to what they say can
provide you with additional clues to their likes and dislikes. Make a conscious
eﬀort to direct the conversation toward the things you have in common.
Talking about shared experiences, interests, hobbies, jobs, or any number of
other common topics enhances rapport and the development of friendships.
Here are a few illustrations of how quickly you can ﬁnd common ground with
other individuals.
