EYE CONTACT
Eye contact works in concert with other friend signals. Eye contact can be
attempted from a distance and, therefore, like other nonverbal signals in this
chapter, it is a way to get noticed before a word is spoken. Also, like the other
nonverbal signals, it is designed to give the signal receiver a positive impression
of you, as someone who will be perceived as a potential friend.
To send a friend signal via eye contact, pick out your person of interest and
establish eye contact by holding your gaze for no longer than a second.
Holding an eye gaze for longer than that can be perceived as aggression, which
is a foe signal. As mentioned earlier, when you stare at someone, especially in a
dating environment, you are invading his or her personal space. If you do not
have permission to enter that individual’s personal space, your actions will be
perceived as predatory behavior at best, creepy at worst. You should end the
eye gaze with a smile. If you cannot manage a genuine smile, make sure that
the corners of your mouth are upturned and wrinkle the outer edges of your
eyes. A return smile indicates interest. If your person of interest meets your
gaze, looks down and away brieﬂy, and then reestablishes eye contact, you can
approach this person with a high degree of conﬁdence that your overtures will
be well received.
EXTENDED EYE GAZE
Extended eye gaze is a powerful rapport builder. is nonverbal behavior
should not be confused with staring. Typically, when you make contact with
another person, your eyes lock for a second or less and then you break eye
contact. Eye contact lasting more than a second or two will be perceived as
threatening. Staring at people, especially strangers, is considered a foe signal.
However, when two people know and like each other, they are permitted to
make eye contact for longer than a few seconds. People who are romantically
involved often stare into each other’s eyes for extended periods of time. With
the following technique the power of this mutual gaze can be safely used on
strangers to enhance rapport building.
After you make eye contact with your person of interest, hold your gaze for
one second and then slowly turn your head, holding your gaze for another
second or two. e person you are looking at will see your head turning away,
giving the illusion of broken eye contact, and your actions will not be
perceived as staring. is technique allows you to intensify the emotional
content of your friend signal. Increased eye contact should not be used to force
premature intimacy. Men often overuse this technique and sabotage potential
relationships.
PUPIL DILATION
Pupil dilation expresses interest. When an individual sees another person they
like, their pupils, the black portion of their eyes, expand. e wider the
dilation, the more the attraction the person feels. is is obviously a cue for
positive attraction, although it is diﬃcult to spot in everyday personal
interactions. us its value as a friend signal is very limited.
Pupil dilation is most noticeable in people with blue eyes. People who have
dark eyes appear more exotic because their eyes appear to be dilated all the
time. In the last century BC, Cleopatra, the most beautiful woman of her time,
used atropine, a naturally occurring drug, to dilate her pupils to make herself
appear more sensual. Pupil dilation can occur with changes in ambient light,
so care should be taken when interpreting this autonomic response.
GETTING CONSENT TO GO TO PRISON: USING FRIEND SIGNALS TO
ENCOURAGE A CONFESSION
In one particular case, while I was at the FBI, we had identiﬁed a suspected
child molester. We knew of one victim, but signs pointed to many more. It was
believed that the suspect used his computer to target victims. I wanted to arrest
him immediately but lacked the necessary probable cause to obtain the arrest
warrant.
I decided to interview the suspect to seek his consent for the FBI to
examine his personal computer. If the interview had any chance of success, I
had to create a nonthreatening environment, quickly build rapport, and, when
the time was right, ask for consent. I invited the suspect to meet me at the FBI
oﬃce. I did this to give him a sense of control (he could determine his course
