e freedom to look in forbidden spaces is one of the most common
nonverbal “tells” that expose undercover oﬃcers. For example, an undercover
oﬃcer is assigned to go to a bar where known drug dealers hang out, to make
friends with them and buy drugs. When the undercover oﬃcer walks into the
bar for the ﬁrst time, he will, out of habit, pause for a moment, make a slow
scan of the room looking for possible threats, walk to the bar, and order a
drink. e undercover oﬃcer feels comfortable invading other people’s space
with his eyes (making direct eye contact) because of his authority as a law
enforcement oﬃcer. e problem is that normal people don’t act this way
when they enter a bar for the ﬁrst time, especially a shady establishment.
When people enter a bar for the ﬁrst time, they typically walk directly to the
bar or a table and sit down without making direct eye contact with anyone.
Once they are seated and have a drink in hand, they then are permitted to take
furtive looks around the bar. Conversely, people who routinely frequent the bar
have earned the right to invade personal space and are permitted to look
around the bar for friends when they enter. is nonverbal tell, albeit subtle, is
easily picked up by criminals, who, for fear of getting caught, are very adept at
reading people.
An eye roll
EYE ROLLS
Rolling your eyes at someone is a “foe signal” that discourages further
interaction. It sends the message you think the individual is stupid or that his
or her actions are inappropriate. If, for instance, you are in a large group and
spot someone saying something you think is dumb, you might roll your eyes in
response. If the person who made the comment sees you doing this, it
predisposes them to respond negatively to you in any future interactions. is
holds true whether you are a stranger or are known to that individual.
WATCH FOR EYE ROLL
Watching for eye rolls at meetings can be an entertaining way to pass the time,
and can provide information about where people stand on speciﬁc issues.
When people disagree with a comment or proposal, they will often roll their
eyes when the person who made the comment or proposal turns away or looks
at his or her notes. is nonverbal signal identiﬁes who is not receptive to what
is being said.
If you make a comment and catch somebody rolling their eyes, focus your
attention on that person to try to convince them your idea has merit.
Remember: You don’t have to spend time trying to convince the choir, the
ones who are nodding their approval, leaning forward, and smiling.
SQUINTING OF THE EYES
is foe signal is not as powerful as other foe cues are, but can still have a
chilling eﬀect on personal relationships. If the squinting is due to factors such
as looking into bright illumination, it might be wrongly interpreted.
FURROWED EYEBROWS
is is another common foe signal, assuming it is not due to someone being in
deep concentration. is nonverbal cue is often associated with disapproval,
uncertainty, or anger.
