open palms. Expressive gestures reinforce verbal communication and mutual
interest.
You can encourage potential friends to continue speaking (and like you
more because of it) by additional head nodding, smiles, and focused attention
(when you lean forward, cock your head slightly and appear to be listening
intensely to what is being said). Be aware that nonverbal gestures can also
signal discomfort, dislike, or disinterest.
HEAD NODDING
One way we signal to a speaker that we are engaged with them and that they
should continue is with a head nod. It tells the speaker to keep talking. A
double nod tells the speaker to increase the tempo of the speech. Multiple head
nods or a single slow nod tend to cause a disruption in the speakers cadence.
Excessive head nodding can rush a response. Rapid head nodding sends a
nonverbal cue for the speaker to hurry his or her response, usually because the
listener wants to say something or is disinterested. Inappropriate rapid head
nodding can be perceived as rude behavior or an attempt to dominate the
conversation. is behavior takes the focus oﬀ the speaker and turns the
spotlight onto the listener, which is a clear violation of the Golden Rule of
Friendship, and will be discussed in the next chapter. Used correctly, head
nodding allows the speaker to fully express his or her thoughts in a satisfying
manner. If you use appropriate head nods, you will be perceived as a good
listener, and viewed in a positive light.
VERBAL NUDGES
Verbal nudges reinforce head nodding and encourage the speaker to continue
talking. Verbal nudges consist of speech conﬁrmation indicators such as “I see”
and “Go on” plus word ﬁllers such as “Ummm” and “Uh-huh.” Verbal nudges
let the speaker know that you are not only listening but are also validating the
speaker’s message with verbal conﬁrmation.
FOCUSED ATTENTION
Don’t let distractions interrupt your attentive listening to the speaker. You
want to send the message that what the speaker is saying is important to you.
at message will ring hollow if you answer your cell phone and put the
speaker on hold. If your cell phone rings while you are in a conversation, ﬁght
the urge to answer. For reasons unknown, most people feel compelled to
answer a ringing phone. Just because your cell is ringing doesn’t mean you are
obligated to answer it. Rarely are telephone calls urgent. If no message is left,
that is clearly the case. And if a message is left, you can listen to it, usually in a
matter of minutes, once your conversation has ﬁnished. Even in today’s tech-
savvy world, texting and answering telephone calls during a conversation is
disrespectful.
e best way to handle a ringing phone is to take it out of your pocket or
purse, send the caller to voice mail, put it back into your pocket or purse, and
return your attention to the speaker. is action sends a deliberate message to
the speaker that he or she is more important than a telephone call and they
have your undivided attention. Plus, you will make a positive impression on
them . . . m aking any relationship easier to achieve.
SEVEN TIPS TO GET HIGHER TIPS
Getting people to like you, even for a onetime encounter, can be beneﬁcial. You are more likely to have
complaints addressed properly, you are more likely to get people to assist you, even when they don’t have to go
the extra mile, and—if you’re a waiter or waitress—you can predispose people to show their appreciation for
personal service in the form of higher tips.
The key to receiving higher tips is to create an environment that pre disposes customers to like the server.
Tip 1: Lightly Touch Customers (Female Servers)
Research shows that female servers who touch customers, male or female, lightly on the shoulder, hand, or arm
receive higher tips than from customers who are not touched. Males, in particular, drank more alcohol than
customers who were not touched, creating more opportunities to tip the server. Touch when interpreted properly
produces a feeling of friendliness and, therefore, pre disposes customers to tip more generously.
A word of warning: Touching can have a negative effect if it is perceived as ﬂirtatious or dominating and
could reduce the amount of tips rather than increase them. Female servers should be careful when touching
male customers who are in the company of involved females because any touching could produce jealousy.
Tip 2: Wear Something in Your Hair (Female Servers)
Female servers who wear ornamentation in their hair such as ﬂowers, real or fake, barrettes, or other similar
objects receive higher tips from both male and female customers. One explanation for this ﬁnding is that
customers may perceive servers who wear ornaments in their hair as more attractive, which thus predisposes
