giving the viewer advance notice of what they can expect from the main
attraction and helping them decide if it’s worth their time to pursue or avoid.
DON’T BASK IN THIS SPOTLIGHT!
If you use your friend signals eﬀectively, you will have set the stage for a
successful interaction to follow. Getting another person’s attention and, at the
same time, encouraging them to see you in a positive light is a critical ﬁrst step
on the path to making friends, but you need to be careful to not bask in the
spotlight. Intentionally sending friend (or foe) signals takes practice.
Subconsciously, people are very adept at transmitting these nonverbal
communications. However, now that you have read about these signals and are
aware of them, you will begin to notice other people sending and receiving
them and, from time to time, you will catch yourself in the act of signaling
others.
In order to consciously imitate the same signals you subconsciously send with
ease and authenticity, you must overcome the spotlight eﬀect. e spotlight
eﬀect triggers when you do something surreptitiously and, because you are
making a conscious eﬀort to inﬂuence people’s behavior, you think that
everybody is aware of what you are doing. is, in turn, makes it diﬃcult for
you to make your behavior appear natural and appropriate, resulting in an
inability to perform your actions in a convincing manner. e end result: Your
actions are not believable or believed.
An example of the spotlight eﬀect in action involves someone who lies. e
liar thinks that the person he is lying to can see right through the lie, even
when that individual is totally unaware of the deception. is, in turn, causes
the liar to display verbal and nonverbal cues that actually indicate deception,
allowing the person on the receiving end of the lie to detect the deception or,
at least, become suspicious of what is being said.
e same thing happens when you ﬁrst attempt to consciously imitate
friend signals. You’ve been successfully sending these signals throughout your
life; yet, the ﬁrst few times you approach people and consciously attempt to tilt
your head and display an eyebrow ﬂash, you will think they know you’re
socially awkward. e spotlight eﬀect takes hold. is causes you to “force” the
behavior—your head tilts and eyebrow ﬂashes become awkward—and your
intentions are revealed, leaving you as the victim of your own self-fulﬁlling
prophecy . . . and a failed attempt to make a friend. If you want to avoid the
spotlight eﬀect, you ﬁrst have to know of its existence.
Now you do.
THE NONVERBAL TWO-STEP
During my FBI career, I attended many conferences and parties. On one
occasion, I attended a pre-conference “get-to-know-you party” with a fellow
member of the Behavioral Analysis Program. e party became boring, so my
friend and I amused ourselves by playing “nonverbal footrace.”
e game worked like this: We each selected partygoers who were at an
equal distance from the door. e object of the game was to see who could get
their selected target to cross the threshold of the door without them realizing
what they were doing. We initially engaged each of our targets in casual
conversation at an acceptable physical distance. Knowing that people
unconsciously try to maintain a comfortable distance from the person they are
talking to, we took imperceptible steps closer to our targets. As the space
between us and our targets closed, they unconsciously stepped backward to
maintain their personal space. We repeated this maneuver until our targets
passed the doorjamb. e ﬁrst person to accomplish this was declared the
winner. In one instance, I backed my target into the lobby of the hotel without
his conscious awareness. When he realized where he was, he exclaimed,
“Whoosh! How did we get out here?” I just smiled and shrugged my shoulders.
e ﬁrst step in successfully imitating friend (or foe) signals is to watch how
other people naturally display these signals and, also, to monitor your own
signals. When you imitate a friend signal, try to duplicate the same sensation
you feel when you catch yourself automatically displaying these nonverbal
communications.
A good place to hone these skills is walking down the street, in shopping
malls, and in other public places. When a person approaches, tilt your head,
make eye contact, and smile. Watch the person’s reaction. If the individual
returns an eyebrow ﬂash along with a smile, you have successfully transmitted
