e old adage “Absence makes the heart grow fonder” is not necessarily
true. e farther apart an engaged couple live from one another, the greater the
probability their engagement will not survive.
THE LAW OF ASSOCIATION
When people associate in large groups, people on the outside of the group tend
to assess individual members of the group based on their overall impression of
the total group. So, when a less attractive individual wants to be seen as more
attractive, he or she should associate with a group of attractive people.
Conversely, an attractive person may be viewed as less attractive if he or she is
in the company of unattractive people.
It seems that adult life doesn’t change all that much from high school. If
you want to be “popular,” you still need to hang out with the popular people.
In a business situation this means always try to “friend up,” not down. Who
you associate with matters. If you want to be seen as successful, you need to
hang out with successful people.
e Law of Association works diﬀerently when, instead of looking at how
one person’s attractiveness is aﬀected by being in a large group, the focus is on
how people are compared and perceived when they are with just one or two
others. In these circumstances, if a person wants to appear as more attractive,
he or she should be seen in the company of a less attractive individual. is
phenomenon helps explain the behavior of prospective buyers when they visit
model homes. ey leave their own homes, which are satisfactory in the
morning. After spending all day looking at model homes, they return to what
they now perceive as an unattractive home. eir house becomes less attractive
because they compare it with the more elegant models they recently viewed.
THE LAW OF SELF-ESTEEM
People like to associate with individuals who display high levels of self-esteem.
us, such individuals have an easier time attracting others and making
friends. Individuals with high levels of self-esteem are also self-conﬁdent and
comfortable with being the center of attention. ey are also comfortable with
self-disclosure, which is a building block in creating close personal
relationships.
To people with high self-esteem, rejection is part of life, not a reﬂection on
their self-worth. Conversely, people with low self-esteem are reluctant to
disclose personal information. eir inability to make self-disclosures serves as
a defense mechanism to guard against criticism and rejection. Self-disclosure is
the path to closer personal relationships; unfortunately, for a person with low
self-esteem it is the “path less traveled.” Ironically, it is the fear of self-disclosure
that can lead to the rejection a person with low self-esteem is trying to avoid.
A ﬁne line exists between self-esteem and arrogance. Arrogant people often
feel superior and set themselves apart from others. For this reason, they are
perceived as being “diﬀerent.” As a result, the probability of mutual attraction
is signiﬁcantly reduced, except with other arrogant individuals who share their
attitudes and behavior.
In American society, men and women often deﬁne self-worth in diﬀerent
ways. In the most general terms men derive a sense of self-esteem and social
status from their ability or potential ability to earn money, impress women,
and own high-priced objects like nice cars and real estate. Conversely, though
the American marketplace is experiencing a remarkable shift with more women
graduating from college than men, it is still true that many women gain a sense
of self-esteem and social status through displays of physical beauty,
youthfulness, and relationships with others. ese diﬀerences are evident when
game show hosts ask contestants to brieﬂy describe themselves. Male
contestants usually describe themselves by their occupations (“I am an
electricia n”), whereas, women characterize themselves by their relationships (“I
am a wife and mother of three children”). As more women work outside the
home, they, too, may begin to identify with their professions instead of their
relationships.
When it comes to establishing short- or long-term romantic relationships,
high-status women (young and physically attractive) tend to couple with high-
status men (high earning potential and disposable income). is pattern of
mate selection parallels typical mating strategies. Men select young and
physically attractive women to ensure procreation and women select high
earners with disposable incomes to achieve the security necessary to raise
