relationship developing process is skipped. During this vital step in face-to-face
communication, prospective partners have the opportunity to slowly disclose
information using verbal and nonverbal cues to pace the development of the
relationship and the rate of information release. If things go awry during this
initial step, the two people can go their separate ways without having disclosed
too much sensitive information to create personal vulnerabilities. Because of
the absence of this vital step in written Internet communication, where no
face-to-face interaction occurs, the chances for catphishing increase.
Recruiting people to spy for the United States follows a similar relationship
pathway. Spies need to be groomed. e steps required to develop close
friendships or romantic relationships are the same ones required to convince a
person to become a spy. In several cases, I tried to rush the relationship due to
operational demands. ese recruitments always failed because I skipped the
initial step in relationship development. e ﬁrst step is critical. Revealing too
much information too soon will dampen the relationship. e recruitment
target will disengage. As mentioned earlier, a partner is seen as too “fast” or too
“slow” if the expectation milestones for relationship development are hurried
or lagging. Internet relationships often violate relationship expectations
because partners are propelled to a higher level of relationship intensity before
they are psychologically prepared to do so. is creates vulnerabilities for both
partners to the interaction.
EMOTIONAL INVESTMENT
e longer the Internet relationship continues, the more likely people are to
remain in the relationship because of their deep emotional investment. is
doesn’t mean they are actually a good couple, but because they’ve spent too
much time in the interaction, they don’t feel they can just quit, and besides,
the relationship has developed to a point where the volume of sensitive
information released creates personal vulnerabilities so signiﬁcant that giving
up is not an option.
AN EXAMPLE OF HOW EMOTIONAL INVESTMENT WORKS IN THE REAL WORLD
To illustrate how emotional investment affects a person’s behavior, let me illustrate how you can use it to your
advantage in certain situations, particularly when buying big-ticket items. Let’s assume you want to purchase a
new car. In this case, you would ﬁrst ﬁnd the vehicle you want and then tell the salesperson that you will buy it
today if you can get it for the right price. Then take out your checkbook and write the date and name of the
dealership on a check. Explain to the salesperson all that’s required to wrap up the deal is the amount of the
down payment and your signature. This partially completed check sends a message to the salesperson that you
are serious about buying a car. State the price you want to pay and be ready to wait the salesperson out.
In one instance that I tried this, I negotiated eight hours for a vehicle! At the end of the salesperson’s shift,
she relented. She reasoned that she spent eight hours negotiating with me and to not sell me the car would be
a waste of her time, time she could have spent selling cars to other people. The emotional investment she put
into the negotiations psychologically pressured her into taking my ridiculously low offer; otherwise she would
have had to face the prospect of failure.
COGNITIVE DISSONANCE
Cognitive dissonance occurs when people hold two or more conﬂicting ideas
or beliefs simultaneously. People continue in Internet relationships when they
know the relationship should stop to avoid cognitive dissonance. ey do not
want to believe that the person they are communicating with is not who they
say they are, because that creates cognitive dissonance.
Take yourself as an example. You view yourself as a knowledgeable,
discerning person. You also love the person you have met and are
communicating with online. If you admit that you are the victim of
catphishing, then you are naïve and gullible; therefore, you refuse to believe
that the person you are writing to is a fraud, to avoid the bad feeling that
comes with cognitive dissonance.
Manti Te’o, the Notre Dame football player who fell victim to an online
predator, expressed the conﬂict caused by cognitive dissonance in this
comment about his catphishing experience: “is is incredibly embarrassing to
talk about, but over an extended period of time, I developed an emotional
relationship with a woman I met online. We maintained what I thought to be
an authentic relationship by communicating frequently online and on the
phone, and I grew to care deeply about her. To realize that I was the victim of
what was apparently someone’s sick joke and constant lies was, and is, painful
and  humiliating. . . . In retrospect, I obviously should have been much more
cautious. If anything good comes of this, I hope it is that others will be far
more guarded when they engage with people online than I was.”
