CLERK: No. It’s only 50 percent.
ME: And then your 10 percent commission. (presumptive statement)
CLERK: Not that much. I only get 5 percent.
ME: I suppose you don’t have the authority to discount. (presumptive statement)
CLERK: I am authorized to give a 10 percent discount. Anything after that, the manager has to
approve.
At this point, I could either take the 10 percent discount or press further.
Given the poor economic conditions when I visited this jewelry store, I
suspected the manager would be willing to give me a further discount, if he
still made a proﬁt.
ME: Ask the manager if he will sell this piece at a 40 percent discount. (I waited patiently as the
clerk went into the back room. She returned a few minutes later.)
CLERK: He said the best he can do is 30 percent if you pay cash.
ME: It’s a present for my wife.
Clerk: No problem. I’ll gift wrap it for you. (I not only saved $57, but got gift wrapping, too!)
In this case, using elicitation instead of direct questions yielded valuable
information. I was able to ascertain the markup on the jewelry (50 percent)
and the clerk’s commission (5 percent), which allowed me to negotiate with
conﬁdence. If I did not want to negotiate, I could have taken the automatic 10
percent discount for a savings of $19. Had the clerk not divulged this
information, I would have paid full price. Based on the clerk’s behavior, she did
not realize she had revealed closely held information.
EMPATHIC ELICITATION
e Empathic Statement is versatile because it can be combined with
elicitation techniques. Two empathic elicitation techniques that are based on
the human need to correct will be discussed, the empathic presumptive and the
empathic conditional. Salespeople routinely use empathic elicitation. Customers
are less likely to buy something from someone they don’t like. Salespeople use
empathic elicitation to accomplish two goals. First, empathic statements
quickly build rapport, and second, empathic elicitation gleans information
from customers that they would not normally reveal under direct questioning.
EMPATHIC PRESUMPTIVE
e empathic presumptive keeps the focus of the conversation on the customer
and presents a fact as the truth. e presumptive can be either true or an
assumed fact regardless of its veracity. If the presumptive is true, the customer
will usually add new information to the conversation.
e salesperson could then construct another empathic statement based on
the customer’s response to prompt more information. If the presumptive is
false, the customer will typically correct the presumptive. Just look at this
example:
SALESPERSON: May I help you?
CUSTOMER: Yes, I have to buy a new washer and dryer.
SALESPERSON: So, your old washer and dryer are on their last legs? (empathic presumptive)
CUSTOMER: No, I’m moving to a small apartment.
SALESPERSON: Oh, so you’ll need a compact washer and dryer. Let me show you a popular
stacked unit that we sell.
CUSTOMER: Okay.
e salesperson listened to what the customer said, “I have to buy a new
washer and dryer,” which suggests the customer’s current washer and dryer are
not functioning well. e salesperson used the empathic presumptive to keep
the focus on the customer and encourage the customer to aﬃrm or deny the
presumptive, “So, your old washer and dryer are on their last legs?” e
customer corrected the salesperson by saying, “I’m moving to a small
apartment.” is added information identiﬁes what type of unit the
salesperson should direct the customer to. e words “have to buy” indicates
that the customer is serious about buying a washing machine and dryer as
opposed to just looking. e salesperson obtained important facts during the
opening exchange of information. First, the customer is a serious buyer and the
sales person knows exactly what category of washer and dryer the customer is
likely to purchase. is information saves the customer and the salesperson
time. e customer goes home with the product he needs and the salesperson
has more time to serve other customers.
EMPATHIC CONDITIONAL
e empathic conditional keeps the focus of the conversation on the customer
and introduces a set of circumstances under which the customer would
