in long-term relationships, where years of inter active communication with the
same individual can give us a better understanding of how to strengthen or
weaken personal bonds.
In long-term relationships, communication is a key element in sustaining or
draining the feelings we have toward one another. Open, honest interchanges
between long-term partners build trust, demonstrate a caring attitude, and
provide vital information about the on going health of the relationship.
If, from the start of any relationship, you have been a proponent and
practitio ner of active listening, you will have a great advantage the longer the
relationship lasts. is is because you will have a far better understanding of
your partner’s particular needs, personal “quirks,” interests, personality, desires,
fears, and which conversational topics are to be explored or avoided.
Without active listening, it is possible for some couples who have been
together for decades to have literally no idea how their partner really feels or
what they want. is is because they haven’t paid attention to what their
partner was saying! As hard as it might be to believe this could happen, it does;
sadly, more often than most people would care to admit. Active listening
allows open, two-way communication, where the give-and-take of information
is facilitated by active speaking and listening.
One of the greatest beneﬁts of active listening in a long-term relationship is
the ability to make ﬁner discriminations concerning how to best care for your
partner. Whereas in a new or early-stage relationship the chance of saying “the
wrong thing” is a distinct possibility, these conversational errors should drop
oﬀ dramatically (even disappear altogether) as the relationship matures and the
parties to the interaction get to know each other better through active
listening.
Any individual who has actively listened to his or her long-term signiﬁcant
other knows full well what word mines to avoid and the hot-button issues that
shouldn’t be pressed. A caring person uses this information to strengthen the
relationship. On the other hand, this knowledge can be used to weaken and
even destroy relationships. is occurs most frequently during ﬁghts when one
party to the argument purposely “pushes” the other person’s hot button,
eﬀectively escalating the conﬂict and inﬂicting mental pain at the same time.
is is a very bad strategy to employ, even if a person is mad or it helps win an
argument. e problem is that long after the argument is over and the reason it
started is forgotten, the emotional aftermath of being hurt by a person’s words
will linger.
Even though it might be tempting to use information you have learned
from previous discussions to win an argument or “get in your licks” during a
ﬁght, don’t do it if your partner considers such information “oﬀ-limits.” Resist
the temptation to lash out with your tongue! Over time, if a person persists in
deliberately tripping word mines, pushing hot-button issues, or bringing up
topics that are considered oﬀ-limits in arguments, the relationship might very
well collapse as a result.
KEEP YOUR VOICE AWAY FROM THE HOT BUTTON!
Be an eﬀective active listener. Not only will you be seen as more caring; you
will also achieve a greater understanding of your partner and strengthen your
relationship in the process. Here are a few additional hints to make your active
listening more eﬀective:
• Let your partner ﬁnish what they are saying before you begin talking.
• Important discussions deserve an appropriate setting where you can easily hear what your
partner is saying (don’t talk about ﬁnances or life-changing events in a noisy, crowded
restaurant!).
• Don’t be thinking of what you’ll be saying while your partner is talking; focus on their words,
not your thoughts.
• If your partner is introverted and ﬁnds it uncomfortable to speak, encourage them with head
nods and verbal nudges (see Chapter 5).
• Observe your partner while they speak. Communication is nonverbal as well as verbal. Also, by
paying attention to your partner they are most likely to see you as sincerely interested in what
they have to say.
• Be prepared to compliment your partner when they make a good point or suggestion.
• When you hear something you don’t like or agree with, don’t automatically dismiss the
comment or go on the oﬀensive. Give the observation some thought and see if there might be
some truth in what was said or, at least, some room for reaching a compromise that is
satisfactory to both partners.
• If your partner is clearly wrong in a given situation, try to help them ﬁnd a face-saving way to
gracefully own up to their error.
• You can even suggest a “time-out” if you feel the conversation is becoming confrontational.
REINFORCEMENT
