Tapping on a cell phone keyboard and having earbuds in place shuts you out
of the sending or receiving of friendship signals. And the lack of personal
interaction with other people reduces the opportunity for you to sharpen your
social skills or learn from observing others.
Learning from others doesn’t even take much eﬀort. All you need to do is
go to a restaurant and people-watch. People feel comfortable communicating
when they are eating or drinking. See if you can determine the status and
intensity of relationships by observing the non verbal signals of nearby couples.
ROMANTIC RELATIONSHIPS
When two people walk into a restaurant you can tell if they are a couple or not
by observing their nonverbal behaviors. Hand holding is a sign of romantic
interest. Couples who hold hands without interlacing their ﬁngers indicate a
less intimate relationship than if they hold hands with their ﬁngers interlaced.
e following sequence of actions typically takes place after the couple sits at a
table or booth: 1) the center piece, menu stand, or condiment rack is moved to
one side of the table, 2) the couple exchange eyebrow ﬂashes, 3) the couple
look at each other for a longer time than they would look at strangers, 4) they
smile, 5) they tilt their heads to one side or the other, 6) they lean in toward
each other, 7) they mirror each other’s posture, 8) they hold hands, 9) they
freely use gestures when they communicate, 10) they whisper, or lower their
voices, to signal to others that the conversation is private and intruders are not
welcome, and 11) they share food. is sequence of activity may not take place
in the exact order listed or may be interrupted by waitstaﬀ, but you will
observe some or all of these nonverbal cues at some point during the course of
dinner.
BROKEN RELATIONSHIPS
Relationships that are strained will become obvious because the normal
nonverbal cues present in a good relationship will be absent. For example, the
couple will not look at each other. eir smiles are forced. One or both will
often look at their plates when they speak. Heads are erect, not tilted. eir
eyes are sweeping across the restaurant looking for other stimuli. ey don’t
mirror each other’s postures. ey don’t lean toward one another; in fact, they
are usually leaning backward, away from each other.
SPLIT RELATIONSHIPS
A nonverbal sequence that indicates that one member of the couple is
interested in the other person but the other person is not interested in them is
not hard to spot. e interested person displays all the nonverbal cues present
in a romantic relationship as previously described; however, the other person is
displaying negative nonverbal cues (foe signals).
The man is displaying nonverbal cues indicating interest; the female is not.
QUIET COMFORT
Couples who have spent many years together often display nonverbal cues that
signal a bad or broken relationship, but this is not always the case. People who
spend a long time in each other’s company are conﬁdent that the other person
is committed to the relationship. ey don’t need constant reminders. ey are
relaxed and comfortable in each other’s company without the fear of betrayal
