Angry friends, coworkers, or family members create stress. ey can make your
work and home life most unpleasant. Developing eﬀective anger management
strategies forms the cornerstone for goodwill and a distinctly more pleasant
environment, at home and in the oﬃce.
An eﬀective anger management strategy involves keeping the focus of the
conversation on the angry party, allowing him or her to vent, and in addition
provides a directed course of action to deal with the problem that caused the
anger in the ﬁrst place. is breaks the anger cycle and allows for the resolution
of crisis situations without damaging personal relationships. People will like
you more as a result of your handling of a crisis situation because in the end
you will make the angry party feel good about themselves by reducing their
stress and, equally important, yours as well. Here are some guidelines for
handling anger in the best way possible.
Do Not Engage Angry People Because They Are Not Thinking Logically
Anger triggers the ﬁght or ﬂight response, which mentally and physically
prepares the body for survival. During the ﬁght or ﬂight response, the body
automatically responds to a threat without conscious thought. As the threat
increases, a person’s ability to reason diminishes. Angry people experience the
same phenomenon because anger is a reaction to a real or perceived threat.
Angry people talk and act without thinking. e level of their cognitive
impairment depends on the intensity of their anger. e more angry people
become, the less likely they are to logically process information. Angry
individuals are not open to solutions when they are mad, because their ability
to think logically is impaired.
e body takes about twenty minutes to return to normal after a full ﬁght
or ﬂight response. In other words, angry people need time to calm down
before they can think clearly again. Angry people will not completely
comprehend any explanations, solutions, or problem-solving options until they
can think logically again. Allowing for this refractory period is a critical part of
any anger management strategy. e ﬁrst strategy for breaking the anger cycle
is “Never try to rationally engage angry people.” Anger must be vented before
oﬀering problem solving solutions.
It is imperative when confronting an angry individual to take “time oﬀ to
cool oﬀ.” One writer suggests that when dealing with an angry friend,
colleague, or partner you should “go to the balcony.” is is another way of
indicating that you need to step back from the ﬁre and let things cool oﬀ a bit
before returning to the ﬂames.
In many instances, providing a simple explanation can assuage anger. People
want to feel like they are in control. Angry people seek order in a world that no
longer makes sense to them. e inability to make sense of a disordered world
causes frustration. is frustration is expressed as anger. Providing an
explanation for a given behavior or problem will often reorder a disordered
world and soothe the angered person’s feelings in the process. e following
exchange between a super visor and a subordinate demonstrates the use of this
technique:
SUPERVISOR: I expected you to have your report done by this morning. Your behavior is
unacceptable. (anger)
EMPLOYEE: I couldn’t complete the report because I didn’t receive the data from the sales
department. ey said they would send it within the hour. (provide an explanation)
SUPERVISOR: All right. Get the report ﬁnished as soon as possible. (anger resolution)
If angry people do not accept the simple explanation for a problem, the
potential for verbal escalation increases signiﬁcantly. Anger needs fuel. e
increased anger provokes you to give a more intense response, which provides
additional fuel to an angry supervisor. If this anger cycle continues, at some
point your ﬁght or ﬂight threshold is crossed, causing a reduction in your
ability to think logically. Problem solving becomes impossible when both you
and the other person get caught up in the anger cycle.
Try the “Big Three” Approach to Breaking the Anger Cycle: Empathic
Statements, Venting, and Presumptive Statements
Empathic statements capture a person’s verbal message, physical status, or
emotions, and using parallel language, reﬂect them back to the speaker.
Venting reduces frustration. Once angry people are provided a chance to vent
their frustrations, they become more open to solutions because they think
more clearly when they are not angry. Presumptive statements direct angry
people to take a course of action that leads toward the resolution of the conﬂict
