To illustrate how emotional investment affects a person’s behavior, let me illustrate how you can use it to your
advantage in certain situations, particularly when buying big-ticket items. Let’s assume you want to purchase a
new car. In this case, you would ﬁrst ﬁnd the vehicle you want and then tell the salesperson that you will buy it
today if you can get it for the right price. Then take out your checkbook and write the date and name of the
dealership on a check. Explain to the salesperson all that’s required to wrap up the deal is the amount of the
down payment and your signature. This partially completed check sends a message to the salesperson that you
are serious about buying a car. State the price you want to pay and be ready to wait the salesperson out.
In one instance that I tried this, I negotiated eight hours for a vehicle! At the end of the salesperson’s shift,
she relented. She reasoned that she spent eight hours negotiating with me and to not sell me the car would be
a waste of her time, time she could have spent selling cars to other people. The emotional investment she put
into the negotiations psychologically pressured her into taking my ridiculously low offer; otherwise she would
have had to face the prospect of failure.
COGNITIVE DISSONANCE
Cognitive dissonance occurs when people hold two or more conﬂicting ideas
or beliefs simultaneously. People continue in Internet relationships when they
know the relationship should stop to avoid cognitive dissonance. ey do not
want to believe that the person they are communicating with is not who they
say they are, because that creates cognitive dissonance.
Take yourself as an example. You view yourself as a knowledgeable,
discerning person. You also love the person you have met and are
communicating with online. If you admit that you are the victim of
catphishing, then you are naïve and gullible; therefore, you refuse to believe
that the person you are writing to is a fraud, to avoid the bad feeling that
comes with cognitive dissonance.
Manti Te’o, the Notre Dame football player who fell victim to an online
predator, expressed the conﬂict caused by cognitive dissonance in this
comment about his catphishing experience: “is is incredibly embarrassing to
talk about, but over an extended period of time, I developed an emotional
relationship with a woman I met online. We maintained what I thought to be
an authentic relationship by communicating frequently online and on the
phone, and I grew to care deeply about her. To realize that I was the victim of
what was apparently someone’s sick joke and constant lies was, and is, painful
and  humiliating. . . . In retrospect, I obviously should have been much more
cautious. If anything good comes of this, I hope it is that others will be far
more guarded when they engage with people online than I was.”
EXPOSING CATPHISH
To prevent yourself from being hooked by a catphish, force him or her into the
visual world, where you can use your well-honed knowledge of nonverbal
signals to verify if the person matches up with their online persona and if the
relationship looks as good “in the light of day” as it did on a computer screen.
During the early stages of an Internet relationship, you must realize that the
lack of nonverbal cues puts you at a disadvantage. Establish competing
hypotheses to prevent the relationship from developing too fast.
Always assume that you are the victim of a catphish until visual evidence
proves otherwise. Insist on a face-to-face meeting as soon as possible. is
meeting should take place in a well-populated, public area to reduce the
possibility of personal danger. Also, to make the meeting more comfortable for
both Internet users, a casual, relatively short ﬁrst face-to-face meeting is
recommended; a coﬀee shop rendezvous or lunch date might be best.
In the event a face-to-face meeting is not practical, insist on a visual
meeting on Skype or similar service. An Internet partner who makes excuses to
avoid a face-to-face meeting, or constantly makes excuses as to why a visual
meeting on the Internet is not possible, is sending a strong signal that
something is amiss. At this point, you should immediately break oﬀ your
Internet relationship. To do otherwise puts you in peril, possibly signiﬁcant
peril.
Demanding a visual meeting early in the relationship is a simple yet
eﬀective technique to avoid being hooked by a catphish. Visual meetings allow
you to evaluate nonverbal cues to assess the veracity of your Internet partner.
Visual contact also prevents the development of idealized characteristics to an
unknown person. Developing competing hypotheses reduces the eﬀect of truth
bias. e need to reveal sensitive, personal information is reduced in face-to-
face encounters, thus preventing the relationships from developing too quickly.
Slowing the development of the relationship reduces your emotional
investment, thus minimizing the emotional cost of breaking oﬀ the
relationship.
In genuine relationships, people are eager to communicate visually,
especially early in a relationship. People feel more comfortable in visual
relationships because they can use the social skills they have come to rely on to
