Once you step on a word mine, learn from it. Be sure to aﬃx a mental red
ﬂag to avoid detonations in the future. Unfortunately, the problem of word
mines is unlikely to go away in the near future. In fact, the virtual world in
which we live is strewn with dangerous word mines. You can never be sure
when you will step on one. Personal relationships are more diﬃcult to initiate
and maintain when the verbal landscape is dotted with word mines, both
discovered and hidden.
Communication mishaps are likely to increase in the coming years because
people rely more and more on electronic media such as texting, emails, and
Internet postings to communicate. Symbols such as brackets, periods, and
commas that form happy, winking, or surprised faces often punctuate
sentences to provide additional clues to the reader as to the true meaning of
the communication. Emoticons are also used to clarify messages. When text
messaging ﬁrst became popular, I remember texting my daughter. She
responded to one of my text messages with the letters “LOL.” I wrote back, “I
love you too.” Her response was “Ha, ha. LOL means laugh out loud.” I wrote
back, “I thought it meant Lots of Love.” Her ﬁnal exchange was “I love you
too, Dad.” My communication faux pas with my daughter ended with a
chuckle, but it demonstrates the danger of miscommunication when people
don’t have nonverbal cues to guide a conversation. When using electronic
media to communicate, don’t use sarcasm, understatements, or words that have
double meanings if you want to avoid the possibility of miscommunication.
e best way to keep your verbal communication eﬀective in a world ﬁlled
with word mines is to:
1. ink about the words you are going to use before you say them. Scan ahead for possible word
mines that you’ll want to eliminate from your speech.
2. Observe your listeners for any unusual reaction while you are speaking. It might indicate that a
word mine has been tripped.
3. Do not become defensive or angry if a listener becomes agitated over your use of a word mine
(even if you didn’t know it existed); and
4. Immediately take the time to ﬁnd out if the listener’s discomfort is the result of a word mine
detonation. If it is, apologize for using the word or phrase, explain that you were unaware that
it had a negative connotation to the listener, and assure him or her that you will not use it
again. And then, be sure you don’t.
THE LIP PURSE
No one can read minds, but they can come close by observing non verbal
displays. Some nonverbal cues are more obvious than others. e obvious cues
are easier for observers to read and interpret. Likewise, obvious cues are easier
for speakers to control, thus camouﬂaging their true thoughts. Subtle
nonverbal cues are harder to control and reveal more intimate information.
e lips are one area of the body that can reveal these subtle cues.
A lip purse display is a slight, almost imperceptible, puckering or rounding
of the lips (see photos on page 135). is gesture signals dissension or
disagreement. e more pronounced the lip purse, the more intense is the
dissension or disagreement. Pursed lips mean the person has formed a thought
in their mind that is in opposition to what is being said or done.
Knowing what a person thinks gives you an advantage. e trick is to
change their mind before they have an opportunity to articulate their
opposition. Once an opinion or decision is expressed out loud, changing a
person’s mind becomes more diﬃcult due to the psychological principle of
consistency. Decision-making causes tension to some degree. When a person
makes a decision, tension dissipates. ey are less likely to change their mind
because to do so would mean admitting their ﬁrst decision was a bad one, thus
causing tension. Maintaining an articulated position causes less tension than
going through the  decision-making process again no matter how persuasive the
arguments for change may be. In other words, when people say something,
they tend to remain consistent with what they said.
