understood. Mirroring back what a person says using parallel language closes
the communication circle. People feel good about themselves when they
successfully communicate a message.
Constructing empathic statements requires you to carefully listen to the
other person. Concentrated listening demonstrates that you are really
interested in the other person and understand what they are  saying.
e basic formula for constructing empathic statements is “So you . . .”
ere are many ways to form empathic statements but this basic formula gets
you in the habit of keeping the focus of the conversation on the other person
and away from you. Simple empathic statements might include “So you like
the way things are going today,” or “So you are having a good day.” We
naturally tend to say something to the eﬀect of “I understand how you feel.”
e other person then automatically thinks, No, you don’t know how I feel
because you are not me. e basic “So you . . .” formula ensures that the focus of
the conversation remains on the other person. For example, you get on an
elevator and see a person who is smiling and looks happy. You can naturally
say, “So, things are going your way today,” mirroring back their physical
nonverbal cues.
When using empathic statements to achieve the objective of the Golden
Rule of Friendship, avoid repeating back word for word what the person said.
Since people rarely do this, when it occurs the repetition is processed by the
brain of the listener as abnormal behavior and causes a defensive reaction. is
is the exact opposite eﬀect of what you are trying to achieve by using empathic
statements. Parroting another person’s statement can also sound patronizing
and condescending. Don’t do it!
Empathic statements keep the focus of the conversation on the other person
and make them feel good about themselves. And using empathic statements is
a simple yet eﬀective technique that will have people seeking you out to be
their friend, because every time they converse with you, you make them feel
good about themselves. And, best of all, people will not know you are using
this technique, because they naturally think they deserve the attention and will
not see your actions as being out of the ordinary (it will pass their territory
scan without arousing any attention). Once you have mastered constructing
empathic statements using the basic formula, you can construct more
sophisticated empathic statements by dropping the “So you . . .”
BEN AND VICKI’S EMPATHIC STATEMENT ADVENTURE
Let’s look at how a conversation might work using the techniques discussed
thus far. Using the standard friend signals, Ben sends a nonverbal invitation to
Vicki, who is standing near the bar with several friends. Vicki nonverbally
accepts Ben’s invitation. As Ben approaches Vicki, he notes that she is smiling
and laughing with her friends.
BEN: Hi, my name is Ben? What’s yours?
VICKI: Hi, my name is Vicki.
BEN: So you look like you are really having fun tonight. (basic empathic statement)
VICKI: I sure am. I really needed a night out.
Once you have mastered constructing empathic statements using the basic
formula, you can construct more sophisticated empathic statements by
dropping the “So you . . .” Let’s revisit Ben’s conversation with Vicki using
sophisticated empathic statements instead of the basic formula.
BEN: Hi, my name is Ben. What’s yours?
VICKI: Hi, my name is Vicki.
BEN: You look like you’re really having fun tonight. (sophisticated empathic statement)
VICKI: I sure am. I really need a night out.
BEN: en you’ve been really busy lately. (sophisticated empathic statement)
VICKI: Yeah, I worked sixty hours a week for the last three weeks getting a project done.
With either approach, Ben recognized that Vicki was smiling and laughing,
two physical signs that she was enjoying herself. Ben constructed an empathic
statement that reﬂected her emotional status. Ben achieved several things.
First, he communicated to Vicki that he took an interest in her feelings.
Second, he focused the conversation on her. ird, Vicki’s response lets Ben
know in which direction to steer the conversation. Her response, “I sure am. I
really need a night out,” indicates that Vicki experienced some type of stress
during the week or in the recent past. Ben does not know what that stress was,
but he can construct another empathic statement to explore the reasons for her
stress in a noninvasive way. By doing so, he continues to keep the focus of the
conversation on Vicki and lets her know that he is still interested in her and
