immediately activate your turn signal to mark your turf. You are eﬀectively
telling other drivers to back oﬀ because this is your parking space. Now the
waiting game begins. e driver who is about to pull out of the space ﬁdgets
and ﬁddles with various gadgets mounted on the dashboard, painstakingly
taking his or her time to properly adjust the seat belt and mirrors. You ask
yourself, “What’s taking this person so long to pull out?” e answer is that
they are masters of their space and will not surrender it until they are good and
ready. Interestingly, people leave parking spaces sooner if no one is waiting to
pull in.
DOGMATIC VIEW OF TERRITORIAL FOE SIGNALS
Pets, particularly dogs, provide interesting examples of territorial behavior. For
example, two people enter a friend’s house for the ﬁrst time. One person is an
avid dog lover and the other individual hates dogs. e dog lover immediately
focuses his or her attention on the dog, looks the dog directly in the eyes, and
bends down to pet the animal. To the dog lover’s surprise, the canine growls
and bares its teeth. e dog hater, on the other hand, limits physical and visual
contact with the dog. To the dog hater’s chagrin, the animal approaches, sniﬀs,
and eagerly seeks his attention.
e dog’s reaction to the two strangers seems counterintuitive, but when
viewed from a territorial perspective, it makes perfect sense. e dog lover
violated the animal’s physical space by moving toward it and further challenged
the animal by looking directly into its eyes at ground level. Both dogs and
humans perceive staring as a threatening (foe signal) gesture. e dog viewed
the canine lover’s presence as a threat or a potential threat; therefore, the dog
presented an aggressive threat to protect its territory. With familiarity, the dog
lover will eventually be accepted. Conversely, the dog hater ignored the animal
and consequently posed no territorial threat. Without an actual or perceived
threat, the dog became intrigued by the stranger. In an eﬀort to satisfy natural
curiosity (the same “hook” that got Vladimir to talk to me and Seagull
interested in Charles, the FBI agent), the dog approached the person who
hated it.
BEFORE YOU START WALKING, LET THEIR FEET DO THE TALKING
All right, you’ve got a working knowledge of friend and foe signals, and you
know which ones to display and look for when dealing with strangers you want
to either approach or avoid—maybe you’ve even practiced your nonverbal
signals in front of a mirror. ere’s one more thing to consider before you
actually start speaking with anybody, and that has to do with situations where
your person of interest is not alone but already interacting with others. How
do you break in and start a conversation? When should you break in and begin
talking?
ere are times when you won’t be able to answer such questions. For
example, at business meetings or social events where people are seated at tables
or when they are moving about the room, seamlessly integrating into ongoing
conversations can be diﬃcult. However, if two or more people are standing
together and socially interacting, then you can use foot behavior to help
determine whether it is a good time to approach the group or, conversely, if it
is a better idea to delay your eﬀort to make contact. is is because observing
foot positions oﬀers clues as to which group will accept a new member and
which will be reluctant or unwilling to do so.
Members of a large group who form a semicircle with their feet pointing
toward the open side of the circle are signaling that they are willing to accept
new members. Members of a large group who form a closed circle are signaling
they are not going to be receptive to adding new individuals to their gathering.
If you see two people who are facing each other—each with their feet
pointing toward the other person—they are telegraphing the message that their
conversation is private. Stay away. ey do not want outsiders to interrupt. On
the other hand, if two people are facing each other with their feet askew, this
leaves an “opening” and sends the message that they are willing to admit a new
person to their group.
