gone for two weeks. When I opened the front door and announced that I was
home, I expected a warm hug and a kiss from my wife. at didn’t happen.
Instead she greeted me with “It’s about time you got home. I’m going crazy
because you haven’t been here to help me with the kids.” I could have used the
simple empathic statement “So, you’re angry,” but that would not have gone
over well. Instead, I used a sophisticated empathic statement that addressed the
root cause of her anger. I said, “You feel overwhelmed because I haven’t been
home to help you with the kids.” I struck a sensitive cord. She vented. “I
usually go out every Wednesday night with my friends to take a break from the
kids and talk to some adults for a change.” I could have used a simple
empathic statement such as “You miss going out with your friends,” but, again,
this would not have played out well. Instead, I used a sophisticated empathic
statement that addressed the root cause of her anger. I said, “You value the
time you spend with your friends because it gives you a chance to take a break
from the kids.”
Anger is just a symptom of an underlying problem. Empathic statements
should target the underlying problem. Exposing the real cause of the anger will
promote venting, which can be controlled by constructing eﬀective empathic
statements.
Venting
Venting is a critical component of breaking the anger cycle because it reduces
frustration. Empathic statements portray the target of the anger as
nonthreatening, which reduces the impact of the angry person’s ﬁght or ﬂight
response. Once angry people vent their frustrations, they become more open to
solutions because they think more clearly when they are less angry.
Venting is not a singular event, but rather a series of events. e initial
venting is typically the strongest. is allows angry people to “burn oﬀ” most
of their anger at the onset of the exchange. Subsequent venting becomes
increasingly less intense, unless fuel is added to reignite the anger.
A natural pause occurs after each venting event. During this pause, you
should construct an empathic statement. Since empathic statements encourage
venting, the angry person will likely continue venting, although with less
intensity. After the next natural pause, you should construct another empathic
statement. You should continue constructing empathic statements until the
other person’s anger is spent. Sighs, long exhales, slumping shoulders, and
downward glances signal spent anger. At this juncture, you should introduce
the presumptive statement.
Presumptive Statements
Presumptive statements direct angry people to take a course of action that leads
toward conﬂict resolution. Presumptive statements are constructed in such a
fashion that angry people have diﬃculty not following the directed course of
action. Constructing presumptive statements requires practiced critical
listening skills. e presumptive statement turns the force of the anger toward
a resolution that is acceptable for both parties.
Let’s return to my awkward homecoming discussed previously. After a series
of empathic statements, my wife’s anger burned oﬀ. She let out a great sigh and
her shoulders slumped. Her anger was spent. Now was the time to present a
presumptive statement to direct her to take a course of action that would bring
a resolution. I constructed the following presumptive statement: “Why don’t I
gather the kids up and take them to my mom’s house and we’ll go out to a nice
restaurant? You deserve it.” My wife would have had a diﬃcult time not
following the course of action I presented. If she rejected my suggested course
of action, she would have to admit that she didn’t deserve to go to a nice
restaurant, that she didn’t feel overwhelmed, and that she didn’t need a break
from the kids, which are the very things she expressed as she vented her anger.
Using this technique, I eﬀectively resolved a situation that could have easily
escalated into a major domestic dispute, which would have left us both angry
and frustrated.
If an angry person rejects the presumptive statement, you should begin the
breaking of the anger cycle again with a new empathic statement. If my wife
had rejected my suggested course of action, our conversation might have gone
something like this:
ME: Why don’t I gather the kids up and take them to my mom’s house and we’ll go out to a nice
restaurant? You deserve it. (presumptive statement)
MY WIFE: You’re not getting oﬀ that easy, Mister. (rejection of the presumptive statement)
