interpret these friend signals as positive and are more likely to welcome you
into their gathering.
When you reach the group you have chosen, conﬁdently step into the
empty space. Conﬁdent people are more liked than people who are not self-
assured. Even if you don’t feel conﬁdent, fake it as best you can. A ﬁne line
exists between self-conﬁdence and arrogance. Don’t cross it!
When you enter the once-empty space, listen to the conversation thread
and wait for a pause before saying anything. While you are listening, you
should slightly nod your head. Nodding signals approval and interest in what
the other individuals are saying and also sends the message that you are
conﬁdent, not arrogant. Arrogant people are typically not good listeners. e
group may be willing to accept new members, but no one likes a newcomer
who rudely interrupts an ongoing conversation. When a natural pause in the
conversation occurs, this is your cue to introduce yourself or add to the
conversation you have been listening to.
Try to ﬁnd common ground with the other members of the group. Finding
common ground (similar interests, backgrounds, jobs, etc.) is the quickest way
to develop rapport and kick your friend-making process into high gear.
Techniques to quickly build rapport will be discussed in detail in a later
chapter. If you are at a trade show or conference, you have instant common
ground because everybody at that event shares common interests or else they
wouldn’t be there in the ﬁrst place.
If common ground cannot be readily established, default to the topic of
music. Almost everyone likes music. Even if people do not like the same music,
the similarities and diﬀerences between music genres can foster lively and
usually noncontroversial conversations. You don’t want to discuss topics that
have the potential to create strong feelings and potential conﬂicts, as these can
prove divisive and are antithetical to nurturing budding friendships.
When you see these people later in the event, call them by their names. It
will mean a lot to them. How much? In the words of Dale Carnegie:
“Remember that a person’s name is to that person the sweetest and most
important sound in any language.” People like to be remembered.
Remembering a person’s name assigns them value and recognition and shows
that you care. ings remembered are things cherished.
CONVERSATIONAL BRIDGE-BACKS
When encountering individuals you met earlier, you can employ a
conversational bridge-back. is refers to your use of portions of earlier
discussions at a later time. Conversational bridge-backs can be comments,
jokes, gestures, or other things unique to the earlier conversation. Using a
conversational bridge-back sends the subtle message that you are not a
newcomer to the person’s circle of friends and acquaintances. You are a familiar
person with mutual interests. Conversational bridge-backs also allow you to
pick up the friend-building process where it left oﬀ at the end of the ﬁrst
conversation. at, in turn, allows you to move forward in your friendship
building without having to start out from scratch.
FOOT BEHAVIORAL CUES WHEN A PERSON IS ALONE
If you see a person standing alone and his or her feet are pointed toward the
exit, there’s a good chance that they are thinking about leaving but haven’t yet
made the move. is provides you with an opening to approach that person.
Give friend signals as you approach and then make an empathic statement
(discussed in the next chapter) like “Oh, I see you’re ready to leave” or “Oh,
you ﬁnd the party boring.” You can use such a statement because you are just
describing the physical stance you have observed, which reﬂects that
individual’s inner feelings. Or you might walk up and simply say, “Oh, I see
you’re here by yourself today. What do you think of the place (or event)?”
Hopefully, the person will respond to your inquiry, and you can use the
response to continue the conversation and see how things go from there.
OUT OF THE FIREFLY AND INTO THE FRIENDSHIP: THE NEXT STEP
e making of a friend or foe begins at the ﬁrst moment of contact, usually
visual, and moves forward from there. is chapter has focused almost
exclusively on the nonverbal signals we send out to others and the impact they
have on personal relationships. Because people normally see us before they hear
us, our nonverbal signals are like “coming attractions” or “trailers” for movies,
