she had left behind in Bolivia. At the Buenos Aires airport, the bag was
searched. Hidden inside were 1,980 grams of cocaine. He did end up being
charged for drug smuggling, but fortunately for him he received a very light
sentence.
And what was the real Czech bikini model’s reaction to all this? Fear, over
her name being associated with drug smuggling and “sympathy” for her
academic suitor, who, of course, she had never met on the Internet or
anywhere else. According to Maxine Swann, a reporter who did an elaborate
story on the incident for the New York Times, the professor “reported that he
was a month into his prison stay before his fellow prisoners managed to
convince him that the woman he thought he’d been in touch with all this time
had probably been a man impersonating her.”
Based on this story, you might think I recommend abstaining from using
the digital world to meet people and make friends. However, nothing could be
further from the truth. As long as you know how to tell the friends from the
frauds (which this chapter will show you), the online landscape oﬀers some
distinct advantages.
THE INTERNET IS INTROVERT-FRIENDLY
Introverts disclose more information on social networks than they do in face-
to-face encounters. is is because the Internet format allows introverts
suﬃcient time to formulate meaningful responses. Introverts also experience
diﬃculty initiating conversations, especially with strangers. Social networks
eliminate this added social pressure. Social networks also allow introverts to
express themselves without constantly being interrupted by extroverts. Finally,
introverts are more willing to say what they really believe, not having to worry
about the direct exposure to negative feedback that can occur in face-to-face
communication.
Ease of Finding “Common Ground”
If ever there was a chance for the Law of Similarity (Chapter 4) to operate, it
would be on the Internet. When it comes to ﬁnding common ground with
individuals possessing similar interests, the digital world provides the perfect
environment for matchups. Want to ﬁnd fellow stamp collectors? ere’s an
Internet group for that. Interested in people who exhibit antique automobiles?
ere’s an Internet group for that. Looking for that special group of sports
fanatics who also volunteer at animal shelters and eat organic apples from the
state of Washington? ere’s an Internet group for that. Well, maybe.
e point is that with millions of people on the Internet and thousands of
chat rooms and special interest groups devoted to almost any activity, real or
imaginable, the chance to develop friendships with people sharing similar
interests is never more than a click away.
Numbers
If you’re looking for a friend with speciﬁc qualiﬁcations and interests, where
would you rather look: in a bar or other public place that might hold a
hundred people, or on the Internet, where tens of millions of people await to
be clicked on? e sheer number of people that go online increases your
chances of ﬁnding persons of interest who best ﬁt your particular needs.
Less Chance of Being Embarrassed
Anonymity and the ability to start and end relationships with a click of a
mouse make the online user much less likely to face the humiliation and
embarrassment that comes with face-to-face disapproval or outright rejection.
Of course, should an online user post information and pictures of a
questionable nature, the chance of embarrassment deﬁnitely is increased (as has
been the case with numerous high-proﬁle politicians and celebrities over the
years).
The Ability to Prequalify Potential Friends
Particularly on dating sites, individuals looking for partners have the
opportunity to describe what they want in a potential respondent. Of course,
not all people reading the qualiﬁcations abide by them. Many individuals will
contact you on the Internet even when they do not possess the qualiﬁcations
