observing: 1) what they say, 2) how they say it, and 3) what they do.
If you want to move an angry person toward a resolution, detecting their
emotional state is the ﬁrst step. When you can sense their emotion, you can
then use this to move them in the direction you want them to take.
e trick to spotting a person’s feelings is to pay close attention to verbal
and nonverbal changes in that individual in response to external events. If you
say, “How are you?” and the corners of the person’s mouth turn down and
their voice tone goes ﬂat, then you might detect that all is not well.
e better you are at spotting changes in verbal and nonverbal cues, the
greater your potential ability at empathizing. Watch for small changes on the
face. Listen for tension in the voice and emphasis on speciﬁc words. Listen for
emotional words.
To avoid getting swamped by another person’s emotions, learn to dip in and
out of the association that makes you feel what they do. Go in, test the
temperature, and then get out to a place where you can think more rationally.
Unless you are sure, it ca n be a good idea to reﬂect back on the other person
what you are sensing of their feelings, to check that you have it right. After all,
the only individual who can conﬁrm empathy is the person whose emotions
are being sensed. Reﬂecting back has an eﬀect, typically leading the other
person to appreciate that you  really care about them and hence increasing their
trust in you.
To people who are not angry, empathic statements might seem patronizing,
but this is not the case for angry people, for two reasons. First, the ﬁght or
ﬂight response is engaged, and angry people cannot logically process
information; in this case, empathic statements fall within the human baseline
and if properly constructed, will not be detected by the angry person. Second,
people naturally think that others should listen to them and be sympathetic,
particularly when they are angry.
e key to constructing eﬀective empathic statements is to identify the
underlying reason for the anger. Simply saying, “So you’re angry” is an
empathic statement, but it is stating the obvious and could sound patronizing,
which would add more fuel to an already angry person. I remember a time
early in my FBI career when I was required to travel extensively. We had three
children at the time, a baby and two toddlers. On one particular trip, I was
gone for two weeks. When I opened the front door and announced that I was
home, I expected a warm hug and a kiss from my wife. at didn’t happen.
Instead she greeted me with “It’s about time you got home. I’m going crazy
because you haven’t been here to help me with the kids.” I could have used the
simple empathic statement “So, you’re angry,” but that would not have gone
over well. Instead, I used a sophisticated empathic statement that addressed the
root cause of her anger. I said, “You feel overwhelmed because I haven’t been
home to help you with the kids.” I struck a sensitive cord. She vented. “I
usually go out every Wednesday night with my friends to take a break from the
kids and talk to some adults for a change.” I could have used a simple
empathic statement such as “You miss going out with your friends,” but, again,
this would not have played out well. Instead, I used a sophisticated empathic
statement that addressed the root cause of her anger. I said, “You value the
time you spend with your friends because it gives you a chance to take a break
from the kids.”
Anger is just a symptom of an underlying problem. Empathic statements
should target the underlying problem. Exposing the real cause of the anger will
promote venting, which can be controlled by constructing eﬀective empathic
statements.
Venting
Venting is a critical component of breaking the anger cycle because it reduces
frustration. Empathic statements portray the target of the anger as
nonthreatening, which reduces the impact of the angry person’s ﬁght or ﬂight
response. Once angry people vent their frustrations, they become more open to
solutions because they think more clearly when they are less angry.
Venting is not a singular event, but rather a series of events. e initial
venting is typically the strongest. is allows angry people to “burn oﬀ” most
of their anger at the onset of the exchange. Subsequent venting becomes
increasingly less intense, unless fuel is added to reignite the anger.
A natural pause occurs after each venting event. During this pause, you
should construct an empathic statement. Since empathic statements encourage
venting, the angry person will likely continue venting, although with less
intensity. After the next natural pause, you should construct another empathic
