Term: The New Prude 
Definition: The New Prude is a person excessively concerned with standards of correctness, goodness, fairness, political sensitivity, tastefulness, etc., whilst on the deeper level, they are intrigued by guilty, transgressive pleasures. These people often fear societal judgment, wear drab colors, avoid fashion risks and are addicted to routine.

Term: The Crushed Star
Definition: The Crushed Star is someone whose desire for attention is stronger than most. They were once the center of attention because of their beauty, charm, talent, etc., but those days are gone and they find it hard to accept this change. Despite attempting to suppress these desires, they often end up resenting their current situation.

Term: The Novice
Definition: A Novice is someone who is young, innocent and fatally curious. They desire to be initiated into the world and can sometimes struggle with the burden of innocence. They can be seduced by people with experience, particularly those with a touch of corruption, but require a balance of childlike innocence and hidden depths.

Term: The Conqueror
Definition: The Conqueror is a person with an unusual amount of energy that they are constantly attempting to control. They are constantly on the lookout for people to conquer and obstacles to overcome. They can sometimes appear shy or reserved, but their actions speak louder than their words or appearance. 

Term: Seduction of New Prudes
Definition: The seduction of a New Prude often involves allowing them to criticize or attempt to reform you. This approach provides an opportunity to spend time with them and they can be attracted simply through being in contact with you.

Term: Seduction of The Crushed Star
Definition: Seducing a Crushed Star involves making them the center of attention and acting as though they were stars and you were basking in their glow. Giving them the opportunity to shine will make them feel wildly grateful towards you.

Term: Seduction of a Novice
Definition: To effectively seduce a Novice, a mix of innocence and corruption is required. Initiating them not just sexually but experientially helps, exposing them to new ideas, taking them to new places, new worlds both literal and metaphoric.

Term: Seduction of The Conqueror
Definition: The Conqueror is both a difficult and exciting challenge to seduce because of their unusual energic nature. The strategy for their seduction is not straightforwardly defined within provided content.