Term: Insinuating Desire
Definition: The notion of subtly suggesting or hinting at a romantic or sexual interest in someone. In the story from the 1770s, Madame de T shows insinuating desire by orchestrating events to spend time alone with the young man and get physically close to him.

Term: Paris Opera Encounter 
Definition: An event where a young man went to meet his lover, the Countess de, at the Paris Opera but was instead persuaded by her friend, Madame de T, to accompany her on a trip. She manipulated situations to suggest a romantic desire towards the young man.


Term: Madame de T's Excursion
Definition: A trip, where Madame de T convinces a young man to accompany her to the château as per her assumed plan of reconciling with her husband but also possibly to take benefit of the company of the young man.

Term: The Carriage Incident
Definition: An event where Madame de T uses the excuse of looking at the landscape to get physically close to the young man. A carriage jolt has her grab his hand and fall into his arms, a probable accident but the young man starts to think otherwise.

Term: "Do you intend to convince me of my imprudence in your regard?"
Definition: Quote from Madame de T that is her way of questioning the young man's intentions or kindle a romantic reaction within him.

Term: The château
Definition: The residence of Madame de T's estranged husband, where she takes the young man, supposedly to liven up the proceedings. 

Term: Monsieur's Apartment
Definition: Apartment belonging to Madame's husband where she insists that young man should visit, suggesting concealment or mystery surrounding it.

Term: Initiation Rite
Definition: A reference to a ceremony or process where an individual is admitted to a new status or positions. Madame de T guides the young man into the chamber and it is described as being similar to an initiation rite. 

Term: The Chamber
Definition: A mysterious part of the château specifically Monsieur's apartment. Madame de T takes the young man to this place under serious and hushed implications; the young man refers to it as a sanctuary and is amazed at its beauty and magical aura.