Term: Victim Strategy
Definition: A reiteration of attracting people by virtue of seeming passive or 'the victim' instigating an appeal to their compassionate or protective instincts. In the narrative, Vicomte de Valmont appears sad and downtrodden, intriguing Présidente de Tourvel into thinking he is soul-searching that she believes she can guide his penance.

Term: The Présidente de Tourvel
Definition: A character in the narrative who was a visitor in the château of Madame de Rosemonde. She is young, beautiful, simple, contented to a peaceful country life, and is somewhat curt about why Valmont seems to take so little notice of her.

Term: Vicomte de Valmont
Definition: A character depicted as the most notorious libertine in Paris. In the narrative, he visits the château of his aunt, Madame de Rosemonde, and intrigued Présidente de Tourvel given his apathetic treatment towards her and seemingly repentative character.

Term: Madame de Rosemonde
Definition: A character in the narrative who owns the château that Présidente de Tourvel visits and the aunt of Vicomte de Valmont.

Term: The Tale of Genji
Definition: A classic work of Japanese literature written in the early 11th century by the noblewoman and lady-in-waiting Murasaki Shikibu. The narrative is quoted as insight into the appeal of quiet and submissive women to men.

Term: Hera
Definition: In Greek mythology, the goddess of women, marriage, family, and childbirth, known as the daughter of Cronus and Rhea and the wife of her brother Zeus.

Term: Cronus
Definition: The youngest of the first generation of Titans in Greek mythology. He ruled the cosmos during the Golden Age until he was overthrown by his son, Zeus.

Term: Rhea
Definition: A Titaness in Greek mythology, the wife of Cronus and mother of Olympian gods and goddesses like Zeus and Hera. 

Term: Zeus
Definition: Known in Greek Mythology as the king of the gods, the ruler of Mount Olympus, and the god of the sky, lightning, thunder, law, order, and justice. Known as the twin brother and husband of Hera. 

Term: Temenus
Definition: In Greek mythology, one of the Heracleidae, a great-great-grandson of Heracles (Hercules) and helped lead the fifth and final attack on Mycenae in the Peloponneses. In the narrative, he is known to have brought up Hera in Arcadia. 

Term: The Seasons
Definition: Presumably referring to goddesses of seasons in Greek Mythology who were the nurses of Hera. 

Term: Cnossus 
Definition: The largest Bronze Age archaeological site on Crete, thought to be Europe's oldest city. In the narrative, a location where Zeus courted Hera. 

Term: Mount Thornax
Definition: Mentioned as a place in Argolis, Greece, where Zeus courted Hera according to some beliefs in the narrative.

Term: Argolis
Definition: A region in Greece, part of the Peloponnese peninsula. This was where some say Hera was born.

Note: The terms provided are in context to the narrative provided.