Term: Imposing
Definition: Overwhelming targets with attention in an effort to convince them of one's affection, often seen as an expression of impatience and insecurity.

Term: Aggressive attention
Definition: It's an attempt to command attention or affection that is not personalized, often misinterpreted as just libido at work.

Term: The Art of Letter Seduction
Definition: Incorporating letters into the art of seduction which is best executed several weeks after initial contact. Letters are best designed as homages to your targets, speaking of them as if they were all you could think about—resulting in a delirious effect.

Term: Self-absorbed
Definition: Primarily using words to express own feelings, ideas, opinions, or complaints. It is a limitation for the potential of seduction.

Term: Seductive language
Definition: It is a radical shift in perspective and habit that views words as a tool for confusing, delighting, and intoxicating rather than communicating true thoughts and feelings.

Term: Noise and Music Analogy
Definition: This analogy explains the difference between normal language (referred as noise, something we tune out) and seductive language (compared to music, something we listen and enjoy). Noise is seen as irritation whereas music offers pleasure, just like words used for self-expression and words used for seduction.

Term: The Art of Speaking Effectively
Definition: The technique of using words intentionally to bring about a desired effect or reaction in the listener. This involves not expressing what you do know but speaking in a way that emotionally moves the listener.

Term: Incorporating Emotion in Speech
Definition: Expressing passion or personal involvement in a speech to evoke sympathy and rapport in the listener, effectively making the speech more persuasive. 

Term: Idealizing in Seduction
Definition: Creating the space and time for your targets to idealize you, achieved by making your letters more frequent than your personal appearances.