Term: Prove Yourself
Definition: To dispel doubts about your motives or feelings, you need to take well-timed actions that showcase your willingness to go to great lengths. These actions could be self-sacrificing and targeted towards the person you want to win over.

Term: Effect a Regression
Definition: Invoking pleasurable experiences from a person's past or childhood can make them have affectionate feelings towards you. By positioning oneself in a paternal role, it triggers an emotional response which makes them fall in love with you.

Term: Stir Up the Transgressive and Taboo
Definition: Leading your targets beyond social limits can be immensely seductive. People yearn to explore their dark side and by enticing this, it creates tough bonds. Taking them on this journey is a shared experience which creates a powerful bond due to the guilt and complicity involved.

Term: Use Spiritual Lures
Definition: To effectively seduce, one must divert the focus of their target towards the sublime and spiritual elements, which can include religious experiences, art, the occult. This spiritual aspect eliminates the target's insecurities and doubts, making them feel lighter and enabling them to experience a sexual union as a spiritual one.

Term: Mix Pleasure with Pain
Definition: Being overly nice in seduction can be a turn-off. Mono-tonous kindness can be replaced with imposing guilt and insecurity. Instigating fear and breakups can enhance the erotic charge, taking them on a high after a low.

Term: Give Them Space to Fall—The Pursuer Is Pursued 
Definition: Hinting boredom or showing interest in others after having your targets under your spell can make them pursue you. This reversal of roles enhances the charm and allure, making them want to physically possess you.

Term: Use Physical Lures
Definition: To avoid the target's doubts, one can awaken their dormant senses with a nondefensive attitude combined with a charged sexual presence. This infectious heat allures the target and makes their judgements and concerns melt away.

Term: Master the Art of the Bold Move 
Definition: When the target clearly desires you but is hesitant to admit or act upon it, it's time for you to take a bold step. This involves throwing aside kindness and coquetry and decisions must be made swiftly, without giving them the time to think of potential consequences.

Term: Beware the Aftereffects
Definition: Post a successful seduction, it's necessary to deal with ensuing emotions that may later turn into lassitude, distrust and disappointment. Maintain excitement and allure by creating new conflicts and absences to always be desired. The seduction process requires constant renewal.