Term: Physical Lures 
Definition: The act of using one's confidence, ease, attitude, physical appearances, and senses to allure or attract a person. Creating an atmosphere of the moment in which the target is led to lose themselves to pleasure and physical attraction, overriding rational thought and everyday distractions.

Term: The Moment
Definition: The point in seduction, artfully led to by the seducer, where the target exhibits involuntary signs of physical excitement. This is when all scruples, past and future considerations seemingly vanish as the target gets lost in the immediate sensory experience.

Term: Keys to Seduction
Definition: Methods or techniques used to seduce a person involves, keeping oneself constantly present in the target's mind through shared experiences, letters, and mementos. Intensifying your attention towards the target and making them feel as if everything else comes secondary to them. 

Term: Overactive Mind
Definition: A state of constant distraction and endless information. The seducer uses it as an opportunity to provide the target with a moment of relaxation and focus; a release from the mental overstimulation.

Term: Hypnotist Approach in Seduction
Definition: The act of making the target focus exclusively on the seducer, so that the mind relaxes and the body becomes susceptible to new sensations and suggestions. This in turn slows down an overactive mind, creating a space where all senses are heightened. 

Term: Madame de Lursay's Strategy
Definition: Madame de Lursay, a character in the libertine novel, The Wayward Head and Heart, uses several means of seduction such as wearing revealing clothing, using a trembling voice, throwing heated glances, and physically getting close in an innocent manner to overwhelm the senses of her target, leading to the 'moment' of physical seduction. 

Term: Errol Flynn's Strategy
Definition: A seduction method used by actor Errol Flynn, wherein he made his target feel as if everything came secondary to her, then isolating her in an intimate setting to make his presence constantly felt. His strategy worked by intensifying his attention towards the target and minimizing distractions for the said target.