Term: Empress Dowager Tzu Hsi
Definition: A sixty-three year old Manchu woman who hosted a banquet for the wives of the Western ambassadors to China in 1898. Known for being resistant to western influence and reforms, she ended up seizing power from the Chinese emperor under suspicious circumstances. 

Term: Manchu 
Definition: A race of northerners who had conquered China in the early seventeenth century, establishing the Ching Dynasty and ruling the country for nearly three hundred years. Known for their conservative principles and resistance to modernization.

Term: Chinese Emperor Kuang Hsu
Definition: The empress dowager's twenty-seven-year-old nephew who had started a series of reforms with the blessings of the West. His sickness and eventual loss of power was suspected to be a result of the empress dowager's actions.

Term: Dragon Throne
Definition: The throne of the empress dowager, which was studded with jewels. A symbol of power and authority in China.

Term: Forbidden City
Definition: The official imperial residence in Beijing, where a banquet was held by the empress dowager for the wives of the major Western ambassadors.

Term: Sedan chairs
Definition: Taken from the term for a vehicle consisting of a large box or chair, carried by bearers or drawn by animals, which was used for the wives' transportation to and from the Forbidden City.

Term: Manchu costumes
Definition: The traditional attire worn by the Chinese royalty, including high, jewel-encrusted black headdresses and wonderful designs reflected the hierarchy of those who wore them.

Term: "One family—all one family."
Definition: A phrase repeatedly used by the empress dowager. According to the wives of the ambassadors, it showed warmth and sincerity, contributing to their change in perspective about her.

Term: Confucian terms
Definition: Philosophies derived from the teachings of the Confucian scholar, which had a huge influence on Chinese society. For example, the emperor's conspiracy against his own aunt was considered a terrible crime in Confucian terms.

Term: The banquet
Definition: A grand feast hosted by the Empress Dowager Tzu Hsi for the wives of the Western ambassadors. It was part of a series of elaborate performances aimed at pacifying and winning over the Western powers.
