Term: The Crushed Stars
Definition: These are individuals who, despite being talented, are overlooked or overshadowed. To seduce them, one needs to tone down his/her own shine and let the Crushed Stars feel radiant. The easing of the Crushed Star's pain releases intensity and passion directed towards the seducer.

Term: The Novice
Definition: These individuals are innocent young people with a fatal curiosity about the world. Seducing a Novice requires initiating them into new ideas, places, and worlds both metaphorically and literally. It requires a mix of innocence and corruption.

Term: The Conqueror
Definition: These individuals have an unusual amount of energy and are always searching for obstacles to overcome. To seduce a Conqueror, one needs to give them a good chase and not make it too easy for them to conquer, turning their aggressiveness to an advantage.

Term: The Exotic Fetishist
Definition: These individuals are governed by their interest in the exotic due to feeling a sense of emptiness or self-loathing. To seduce them, one needs to position oneself as exotic and different. But these individuals do not make particularly good victims as they quickly lose interest.

Term: Coy Novice 
Definition: These individuals are somewhat educated in the ways of the world but put on a show of innocence as they understand its power over older people. To seduce these Novices, a mix of innocence and corruption would also work well. 

Term: Female Conqueror 
Definition: Like their male counterparts, these individuals have a high level of energy and desire to overcome obstacles. Female Conquerors can also be seduced by tactics of charm and coquetry. 

Term: Self-loathing Exotic Fetishist
Definition: A subtype of Exotic Fetishist, these individuals have a strong desire for exoticism due to feelings of self-loathing. However, their constant desire for novelty can make it difficult to maintain their interest. 

Term: Circumstantial Exotic Fetishist
Definition: Another subtype of Exotic Fetishist, these individuals turn to exoticism as a temporary escape from banal occupations or dead-end circumstances. They may be more favorable targets for seduction as they look for an escape from their mundane realities.