Term: The Siren
Definition: The ultimate male fantasy figure who offers a total release from the limitations of his life. Her presence is always sexually charged and heightened, and she has the power to transport the male to a realm of pure pleasure.

Term: The Rake
Definition: The Rake is a female fantasy-figure who is desired and appreciated by women. Despite his more negative qualities such as dishonesty and disloyalty, these only add to his appeal, stirring a woman's repressed longings with a mix of danger and pleasure.

Term: The Ideal Lover
Definition: The Ideal Lover thrives on people's broken dreams and lifelong fantasies such as romance, adventure, and lofty spiritual communion. He or she is an artist in creating the illusion people desire, counteracting disenchancement and baseness by reflecting their fantasies.

Term: The Dandy
Definition: Dandies are fluid, creating their own persona and cannot be categorized. They excite others due to the attractive notion of fluid identity and playing with masculinity and femininity. They fashion their own physical image, inducing emotions of startling freedom and sparking repressed desires.

Term: The Natural
Definition: The Natural embodies the longed-for qualities of childhood—spontaneity, sincerity, and unpretentiousness. Around Naturals, people feel at ease, evoking the feeling of warm childhood nostalgia and spontaneous delight.

Term: The Coquette
Definition: The Coquette has the ability to delay satisfaction, keeping the victim in thrall. Masterful at orchestrating a balance between hope and frustration, they lure with the promise of reward, proving elusive yet keeping their targets in pursuit.

Term: The Charmer
Definition: The Charmer is a manipulator who creates a comfortable and pleasurable atmosphere, deflecting attention from themselves and focusing it onto their target. Their strength lies in understanding people's spirit, feelings, and moods, leading people to feel better about themselves.

Term: The Charismatic
Definition: Charismatics radiate a presence that excites others emanating from inner qualities such as self-confidence, sexual energy, purpose, and contentment. They heighten charisma with a piercing gaze, fiery oratory, or an air of mystery, remaining intense yet detached. 

Term: The Star
Definition: The Star stands out through a distinctive and appealing style, providing an escape from daily hardships. They remain vague and ethereal, maintaining a dreamlike quality that works on people's unconscious, allowing them to project their fantasies onto the Star.