Term: Attractiveness
Definition: A tangible benefit for those who possess it. Every culture has widely accepted standards of what is attractive, although these standards might change over time. Attractiveness is not absolute and can be improved by maintaining good eye contact, dressing well, acting upbeat, and listening well.

Term: Benefits of Attractiveness
Definition: Attractive people often earn more, are seen as having more positive attributes, get more attention and higher evaluations, and receive lighter sentences.

Term: Posture and Attractiveness 
Definition: Good posture can increase one's attractiveness. It's suggested to stand straight, tuck in the stomach, hold the head high, and keep a smile to appear more appealing.

Term: The Law of Humor
Definition: Individuals who use humor in social encounters are perceived as more likable. Trust and attraction increase when a light-hearted approach is used during interactions. Humor can reduce anxiety and establish a relaxed mood that helps a relationship to develop more rapidly.

Term: Endorphins and Humor
Definition: Laughing causes a release of endorphins, which makes one feel good about themselves. People will likely like someone more if they make them feel good about themselves through humor. 

Term: Golden Rule of Friendship
Definition: If a person makes people feel good about themselves, they will likely be popular. Laughing at someone's jokes is an indicator of romantic interest. 

Term: The Law of Familiarity
Definition: The more we meet and interact with people, the more likely we are to become friends. One aspect of this law is the importance of physical proximity in establishing relationships. Simple proximity can predispose someone to have positive feelings towards someone, even before they are formally introduced. 

Term: Classroom Seating Charts and Attraction
Definition: Classroom seating charts can predict which students are likely to become attracted to one another. Students who sit in the vicinity of each other are more likely to develop friendships than ones who sit on opposite sides of the classroom. 

Term: Proximity in Professional Settings
Definition: In professional settings, romances and friendships can often be predicted based on physical proximity, such as who sits next to whom.