Term: Interpersonal Attraction
Definition: The process that individuals use to select their friends, romantic partners, and family members. This term was discussed in Ajzen's work in 1977.

Term: Computer-mediated Communication 
Definition: The use of networked computers and other electronic devices to communicate with others. It is a concept discussed by Antheunis, M. L., Valkenburg, P. M., & Peter, J in 2007.

Term: The Theory of Cognitive Dissonance
Definition: The state of having inconsistent thoughts, beliefs, or attitudes, especially as relating to behavioral decisions and attitude change. Introduced by Aronson, E. in 1969. 

Term: Narcissism and Social Networking Web Sites 
Definition: The analysis of how social media sites encourage and amplify narcissistic tendencies in users. Explored by Buﬀardi, L., & Campbell, W. K. in 2008. 

Term: Self-disclosure and Liking
Definition: The process of a person revealing more about themselves, which has been found to increase personability and liking. The concept was reviewed by Collins, N. L., & Miller, L. C. in 1994. 

Term: Inﬂuence: The Psychology of Persuasion
Definition: A book by Robert Cialdini discussing key principles behind the act of persuading, including understanding reciprocity, commitment and consistency, social proof, authority, liking, and scarcity. 

Term: Facial Signs of Emotional Experience
Definition: The study of how emotional experiences can be understood through facial expressions. The concept was introduced by Ekman, P., Friesen, W. V., & Ancoli, S. in 1980.

Term: A Theory of Cognitive Dissonance
Definition: A psychological theory suggesting that we have an inner drive to hold all our attitudes and beliefs in harmony and avoid disharmony. Proposed by Festinger, L. in 1957.

Term: The Nonverbal Dictionary of Gestures, Signs and Body Language Cues
Definition: Document by Givens, D. G. (2014) listing and defining the different non-verbal cues, gestures, and body language signs. 

Term: The Effect of a Woman's Smile on Men's Courtship Behavior
Definition: Study by Gueguen, N. (2008) investigating how a woman's smile influences the courtship behaviors of men.