Term: Networked Seduction
Definition: A concept focused on strategic communication on the Internet. Discussed by Mantovani, F. in the book "Cyberpsychology and Behavior".

Term: Incidental Similarity
Definition: The influence of related concepts or subjects which may lead to self-revelation in response to an intimate survey. Studied by Martin, A., & Gueguen, N. in the "Social Behavior and Personality".

Term: Naturalistic Observations of Smiling and Laughter
Definition: A study of human group interactions analyzing the role of smiling and laughter by Mehu, M., & Dunbar, R. I. M. published in "Behavior".

Term: Scarcity Bias
Definition: An economics and psychology concept that scarcity impacts the perceived value of a product or service. Discussed by Mittone, L., & Savadori, L. in "Applied Psychology".

Term: Nonverbal Courtship Behavior
Definition: The study of human nonverbal signals used during the courtship phase reviewed by Moore, M. in "Journal of Sex Research".

Term: Rapport in Negotiations and Conflict Resolution
Definition: The high efficiency of rapport in conflict resolution and negotiations examined by Nadler, J. in "Marquette Law Review".

Term: Primacy Effect in Credibility Judgments
Definition: The tendency for the first pieces of information received about a person to most influence impressions. Studied by Nahari, G., & Ben-Shakhar, G. in the "Applied Cognitive Psychology".

Term: Bonding after Trauma
Definition: The role of support and the oxytocin system on traumatic stress discussed by Olff, M. in "European Journal of Psychotraumatology".

Term: Communicator Image and Myers-Briggs Type Indicator Extroversion-Introversion
Definition: A study of individuals' communication styles based on their extroverted or introverted tendencies according to the Myers-Briggs Type Indicator. This concept was explored by Opt, S. K., & Loffredo, D. A. in "Journal of Psychology".

Term: Online Romance Scam
Definition: A form of cybercrime where fraudsters fabricate online identities to lure victims into romantic relationships, often resulting in financial losses. Studied by Whitty, M. T., & Buchanan, T. in "Cyberpsychology, Behavior, and Social Networking".