Term: Loving someone from the inside 
Definition: Caring for someone deeply, from the heart, which when expressed, is received with heartfelt gratitude.

Term: Active Listening 
Definition: The practice of using verbal and nonverbal cues along with empathic statements when the other person is speaking. It involves taking into serious account what the other person is saying, responding in a way that makes them feel understood, and remembering the content of communications for future reference.

Term: Long-term Relationships 
Definition: Relationships that have extended over a considerable period where understanding and communication between the people involved increase with time.

Term: Role of Communication in Long-term Relationships 
Definition: Communication serves to build trust, demonstrate a caring attitude, and provide vital information about the ongoing health of the relationship. It is a key factor in sustaining or draining the feelings between people in long-term relationships.

Term: Importance of Active Listening in Long-term Relationships 
Definition: Active listening allows open, two-way communication where the give-and-take of information is facilitated. It gives you a far better understanding of your partner's needs, interests, personality, and even what conversational topics to avoid. In absence of this, couples might fail to understand how their partner feels or what they want.

Term: Consequences of Misusing Knowledge in a Long-Term Relationship 
Definition: Misusing knowledge gained through active listening can weaken and even destroy relationships. This happens most frequently during fights when one person purposely pushes the other person's sensitive areas, escalating the conflict and inflicting mental pain. 

Term: Care for your partner through Active Listening 
Definition: Active listening in a long-term relationship gives you the ability to make finer discriminations concerning how to best care for your partner. It helps in understanding your partner better and avoid saying things that could hurt them.
