Term: Anger Management Strategy
Definition: A method of dealing with anger involving shifting the focus of the conversation to the angry person, providing them an opportunity to vent and providing a directed course of action to deal with the issue that sparked the anger. 

Term: Fight or Flight response
Definition: A natural reflex that mentally and physically prepares the body for survival in face of a threat. During this response, the body reacts unconsciously, reducing a person's ability to think logically.

Term: Refractory period in anger management
Definition: The cooling down period which is needed after a fight or flight response, during which an angry person can begin to think logically again. It is a critical part of any anger management strategy, which typically takes about twenty minutes.

Term: “Never try to rationally engage angry people.”
Definition: A strategy that suggests avoiding engaging with people when they are angry, as their ability to reason and think logically is impaired. Instead allow the person to vent their anger before attempting to solve the problem.

Term: "Time Off to Cool Off"
Definition: A technique used when dealing with angry people which involves taking a break and allowing the individual to calm down before engaging in any discussion or providing any explanations or solutions.

Term: "Go to the Balcony"
Definition: A metaphor for stepping back from an intense or heated situation in order to regain composure and objectivity before proceeding. 

Term: Simple Explanation
Definition: A strategy where an explanation is provided to the angry individuals to help them regain the sense of control and order. It aims at reducing frustration and anger by helping them understand the situation or behavior.

Term: "Big Three" Approach to Breaking the Anger Cycle
Definition: An approach to managing anger that consists of three main strategies: Empathic Statements (matching and reflecting the person's sentiment or feeling), Venting (letting the person express their frustration), and Presumptive Statements (guiding the person towards a solution to the conflict).