Use the Demonic Power of Words to Sow Confusion • 255
Seductive Writing
One spring afternoon in the late 1830s, in a street in Copenhagen, a
man named Johannes caught a glimpse of a beautiful young girl. Self-
absorbed yet delightfully innocent, she fascinated him, and he followed her,
from a distance, and found out where she lived. Over the next few weeks
he made inquiries and found out more about her. Her name was Cordelia
Wahl, and she lived with her aunt. The two led a quiet existence; Cordelia
liked to read, and to be alone. Seducing young girls was Johannes's specialty,
but Cordelia would be a catch: she had already turned down several eligible
suitors.
Johannes imagined that Cordelia might hunger for something more
out of life, something grand, something resembling the books she had
read and the daydreams that presumably filled her solitude. He arranged
an introduction and began to frequent her house, accompanied by a friend
of his named Edward. This young man had his own thoughts of court-
ing Cordelia, but he was awkward, and strained to please her. Johannes,
on the other hand, virtually ignored her, instead befriending her aunt.
They would talk about the most banal things—farm life, whatever was in
the news. Occasionally Johannes would veer off into a more philosophical
discussion, for he had noticed, out of the corner of his eye, that on these
occasions Cordelia would listen to him closely, while still pretending to lis-
ten to Edward.
This went on for several weeks. Johannes and Cordelia barely spoke,
but he could tell that he intrigued her, and that Edward irritated her to no
end. One morning, knowing her aunt was out, he visited their house. It
was the first time he and Cordelia had been alone together. As dryly and
politely as possible, he proceeded to propose to her. Needless to say she was
shocked and flustered. A man who had shown not the slightest interest in
her suddenly wanted to marry her? She was so surprised that she referred
the matter to her aunt, who, as Johannes had expected, gave her approval.
Had Cordelia resisted, her aunt would have respected her wishes; but she
did not.
On the outside, everything had changed. The couple were engaged. Jo-
hannes now came to the house alone, sat with Cordelia, held her hand,
talked with her. But inwardly he made sure things were the same. He re-
mained distant and polite. He would sometimes warm up, particularly
when talking about literature (Cordelia's favorite subject), but at a certain
point he always went back to more mundane matters. He knew this frus-
trated Cordelia, who had expected that now he would be different. Yet
even when they went out together, he took her to formal socials arranged
for engaged couples. How conventional! Was this what love and marriage
were supposed to be about, these prematurely aged people talking about
houses and their own drab futures? Cordelia, who was shy at the best of
times, asked Johannes to stop dragging her to these affairs.
The battlefield was prepared. Cordelia was confused and anxious.Let wax pave the way for
you, spread out on smooth
tablets, \ Let wax go before
as witness to your mind—
\ Bring her your flattering
words, words that ape the
lover: \ And remember,
whoever you are, to throw
in some good \ Entreaties.
Entreaties are what made
Achilles give back \
Hector's Body to Priam;
even an angry god \ Is
moved by the voice of
prayer. Make promises,
what's the harm in \
Promising? Here's where
anyone can play rich....
\ A persuasive letter's \ The
thing to lead off with,
explore her mind, \
Reconnoiter the landscape.
A message scratched on an
apple \ Betrayed Cydippe:
she was snared by her own
words. \ My advice, then,
young men of Rome, is to
learn the noble \ Advocate's
arts—not only to let you
defend \ Some trembling
client: a woman, no less
than the populace, \ Elite
senator, or grave judge, \
Will surrender to
eloquence. Nevertheless,
dissemble \ Your powers,
avoid long words, \ Don't
look too highbrow. Who
but a mindless ninny \
Declaims to his mistress?
An overlettered style \
Repels girls as often as not.
Use ordinary language, \
Familiar yet coaxing
words—as though \ You
were there, in her presence.
If she refuses your letter, \
Sends it back unread,
persist.
—OVID, THE ART OF LOVE.,
TRANSLATED BY PETER GREEN
256 • The Art of Seduction
Then, a few weeks after their engagement, Johannes sent her a letter. Here
he described the state of his soul, and his certainty that he loved her. He
spoke in metaphor, suggesting that he had been waiting for years, lantern in
hand, for Cordelia's appearance; metaphor melted into reality, back and
forth. The style was poetic, the words glowed with desire, but the whole
was delightfully ambiguous—Cordelia could reread the letter ten times
without being sure what it said. The next day Johannes received a response.
The writing was simple and straightforward, but full of sentiment: his letter
had made her so happy, Cordelia wrote, and she had not imagined this side
to his character. He replied by writing that he had changed. He did not say
how or why, but the implication was that it was because of her.
Now his letters came almost daily. They were mostly of the same
length, in a poetic style that had a touch of madness to it, as if he were in-
toxicated with love. He talked of Greek myth, comparing Cordelia to a
nymph and himself to a river that fell in love with a maiden. His soul, he
said, merely reflected back her image; she was all he could see or think of.
Meanwhile he detected changes in Cordelia: her letters became more po-
etic, less restrained. Without realizing it she repeated his ideas, imitating his
style and his imagery as if they were her own. Also, when they saw each
other in person, she was nervous. He made a point of remaining the same,
aloof and regal, but he could tell that she saw him differently, sensing
depths in him that she could not fathom. In public she hung on his every
word. She must have memorized his letters, for she referred to them con-
stantly in their talks. It was a secret life they shared. When she held his
hand, she did so more tightly than before. Her eyes expressed an impa-
tience, as if she were hoping that at any moment he would do something
bold.
Johannes made his letters shorter but more numerous, sometimes
sending several in one day. The imagery became more physical and more
suggestive, the style more disjointed, as if he could barely organize his
thoughts. Sometimes he sent a note of just a sentence or two. Once, at a
party at Cordelia's house, he dropped such a note into her knitting basket
and watched as she ran away to read it, her face flushed. In her letters he
saw signs of emotion and turmoil. Echoing a sentiment he had hinted at in
an earlier letter, she wrote that she hated the whole engagement business—
it was so beneath their love.
Everything was ready. Soon she would be his, the way he wanted it.
She would break off the engagement. A rendezvous in the country would
be simple to arrange—in fact she would be the one to propose it. This
would be his most skillful seduction.
Interpretation. Johannes and Cordelia are characters in the loosely auto-
biographical novel The Seducer's Diary (1843), by the Danish philosopher
Søren Kierkegaard. Johannes is a most experienced seducer, who specializes
in working on his victim's mind. This is precisely where Cordelia's previousTherefore, the person who
is unable to write letters
and notes never becomes a
dangerous seducer.
—SØREN KIERKEGAARD,
EITHER/OR, TRANSLATED BY
HOWARD V. HONG
AND EDNA H. HONG
Standing on a crag of
Olympus \ Gold-throned
Hera saw her brother, \
Who was her husband's
brother too, \ Busy on the
fields of human glory, \
And her heart sang. Then
she saw Zeus \ Sitting on
the topmost peak of Ida \
And was filled with
resentment. Cow-eyed
Hera \ Mused for a while
on how to trick \ The mind
of Zeus Aegis-holder, \
And the plan that seemed
best to her \ Was to make
herself up and go to Ida, \
Seduce him, and then shed
on his eyelids \ And
cunning mind a sleep
gentle and warm. . . . \
When everything was
perfect, she stepped \ Out
of her room and called
Aphrodite \ And had a
word with her in private: \
"My dear child, will you
do something for me, \ I
wonder, or will you refuse,
angry because \ I favor the
Greeks and you the
Trojans?" \ And Zeus'
daughter Aphrodite
replied: \ "Goddess revered
as Cronus's daughter, \
Speak your mind. Tell me
what you want \And I'll
oblige you if I possibly
can." \And Hera, with
every intention to deceive: \
"Give me now the Sex
and Desire \ You use to
subdue immortals and
humans. ..." \And
Aphrodite, who loved to
smile: \ "How could I, or
would I, refuse someone \
Who sleeps in the anus of
