248 • The Art of Seduction
tions. Appear somewhere unexpectedly, say or do something sudden, and
people will not have time to figure out that your move was calculated. Take
them to some new place as if it only just occurred to you, suddenly reveal
some secret. Made emotionally vulnerable, they will be too bewildered to
see through you. Anything that happens suddenly seems natural, and any-
thing that seems natural has a seductive charm.
Only months after arriving in Paris in 1926, Josephine Baker had com-
pletely charmed and seduced the French public with her wild dancing. But
less than a year later she could feel their interest wane. Since childhood she
had hated feeling out of control of her life. Why be at the mercy of the
fickle public? She left Paris and returned a year later, her manner com-
pletely altered—now she played the part of an elegant Frenchwoman, who
happened to be an ingenious dancer and performer. The French fell in love
again; the power was back on her side. If you are in the public eye, you
must learn from this trick of surprise. People are bored, not only with their
own lives but with people who are meant to keep them from being bored.
The minute they feel they can predict your next step, they will eat you
alive. The artist Andy Warhol kept moving from incarnation to incarna-
tion, and no one could predict the next one—artist, filmmaker, society
man. Always keep a surprise up your sleeve. To keep the public's attention,
keep them guessing. Let the moralists accuse you of insincerity, of having
no core or center. They are actually jealous of the freedom and playfulness
you reveal in your public persona.
Finally, you might think it wiser to present yourself as someone reliable,
not given to caprice. If so, you are in fact merely timid. It takes courage
and effort to mount a seduction. Reliability is fine for drawing people in,
but stay reliable and you stay a bore. Dogs are reliable, a seducer is not. If,
on the other hand, you prefer to improvise, imagining that any kind of
planning or calculation is antithetical to the spirit of surprise, you are mak-
ing a grave mistake. Constant improvisation simply means you are lazy, and
thinking only about yourself. What often seduces a person is the feeling
that you have expended effort on their behalf. You do not need to trumpet
this too loudly, but make it clear in the gifts you make, the little journeys
you plan, the little teases you lure people with. Little efforts like these will
be more than amply rewarded by the conquest of the heart and willpower
of the seduced.
Symbol: The Roller Coaster.
The car rises slowly to the top, then suddenly hurtles you into
space, whips you to the side, throws you upside down, in every possible direction.
The riders laugh and scream. What thrills them is to let go, to grant control to someone else,
who propels them in unexpected directions. What new thrill awaits them around the next corner?
Keep Them in Suspense—What Comes Next? • 249
Reversal
Surprise can be unsurprising if you keep doing the same thing again and
again. Jiang Qing would try to surprise her husband Mao Zedong with
sudden changes of mood, from harshness to kindness and back. At first he
was captivated; he loved the feeling of never knowing what was coming.
But it went on for years, and was always the same. Soon, Madame Mao's
supposedly unpredictable mood swings just annoyed him. You need to vary
the method of your surprises. When Madame de Pompadour was the lover
of the inveterately bored King Louis XV, she made each surprise different—
a new amusement, a new game, a new fashion, a new mood. He could
never predict what would come next, and while he waited for the next sur-
prise, his willpower was temporarily suspended. No man was ever more of
a slave to a woman than was Louis to Madame de Pompadour. When you
change direction, make the new direction truly new.
