Seductive Evidence
Anyone can talk big, say lofty things about their feelings, insist on how
much they care for us, and also for all oppressed peoples in the far
reaches of the planet. But if they never behave in a way that will back up
their words, we begin to doubt their sincerity—perhaps we are dealing
with a charlatan, or a hypocrite or a coward. Flattery and fine words can
only go so far. A time will eventually arrive when you will have to show
your victim some evidence, to match your words with deeds.
This kind of evidence has two functions. First, it allays any lingering
doubts about you. Second, an action that reveals some positive quality in
you is immensely seductive in and of itself. Brave or selfless deeds create a
powerful and positive emotional reaction. Don't worry, your deeds do not
have to be so brave and selfless that you lose everything in the process. The
appearance alone of nobility will often suffice. In fact, in a world where
people overanalyze and talk too much, any kind of action has a bracing, se-
ductive effect.
It is normal in the course of a seduction to encounter resistance. The
more obstacles you overcome, of course, the greater the pleasure that awaits
you, but many a seduction fails because the seducer does not correctly read
the resistances of the target. More often than not, you give up too easily.
First, understand a primary law of seduction: resistance is a sign that the
other person's emotions are engaged in the process. The only person you
cannot seduce is somebody distant and cold. Resistance is emotional, and
can be transformed into its opposite, much as, in jujitsu, the physical resis-
tance of an opponent can be used to make him fall. If people resist you be-
cause they don't trust you, an apparently selfless deed, showing how far you
are willing to go to prove yourself, is a powerful remedy. If they resist be-
cause they are virtuous, or because they are loyal to someone else, all the
better—virtue and repressed desire are easily overcome by action. As the
great seductress Natalie Barney once wrote, "Most virtue is a demand for
greater seduction."
There are two ways to prove yourself. First, the spontaneous action: a
situation arises in which the target needs help, a problem needs solving, or,
simply, he or she needs a favor. You cannot foresee these situations, but you
must be ready for them, for they can spring up at any time. Impress the tar-
get by going further than really necessary—sacrificing more money, more
time, more effort than they had expected. Your target will often use theseLove is a species of warfare.
Slack troopers, go
elsewhere! \ It takes more
than cowards to guard \
These standards. Night-
duty in winter, long-route
marches, every \ Hardship,
all forms of suffering: these
await \ The recruit who
expects a soft option.
You'll often be out in \
Cloudbursts, and bivouac
on the bare \ Ground. . . .
Is lasting \ Love your
ambition? Then put away
all pride. \ The simple,
straightforward way in may
be denied you, \ Doors
bolted, shut in your face —
\ So be ready to slip down
from the roof through a
lightwell, \ Or sneak in by
an upper-floor window.
She'll be glad \ To know
you 're risking your neck,
and for her sake: that will
offer \ Any mistress sure
proof of your love.
—OVID, THE ART OF LOVE,
TRANSLATED BY PETER GREEN
The man says: " . . . A
fruit picked from one's own
orchard ought to taste
sweeter than one obtained
from a stranger's tree, and
what has been attained by
323
324 • The Art of Seduction
moments, or even manufacture them, as a kind of test: will you retreat? Or
will you rise to the occasion? You cannot hesitate or flinch, even for a mo-
ment, or all is lost. If necessary, make the deed seem to have cost you more
than it has, never with words, but indirectly—exhausted looks, reports
spread through a third party, whatever it takes.
The second way to prove yourself is the brave deed that you plan and
execute in advance, on your own and at the right moment—preferably
some way into the seduction, when any doubts the victim still has about
you are more dangerous than earlier on. Choose a dramatic, difficult action
that reveals the painful time and effort involved. Danger can be extremely
seductive. Cleverly lead your victim into a crisis, a moment of danger, or
indirectly put them in an uncomfortable position, and you can play the res-
cuer, the gallant knight. The powerful feelings and emotions this elicits can
easily be redirected into love.
Some Examples
1. In France in the 1640s, Marion de l'Orme was the courtesan men lusted
after the most. Renowned for her beauty, she had been the mistress of Car-
dinal Richelieu, among other notable political and military figures. To win
her bed was a sign of achievement.
For weeks the rake Count Grammont had wooed de l'Orme, and fi-
nally she had given him an appointment for a particular evening. The count
prepared himself for a delightful encounter, but on the day of the appoint-
ment he received a letter from her in which she expressed, in polite and
tender terms, her terrible regrets—she had the most awful headache, and
would have to stay in bed that evening. Their appointment would have to
be postponed. The count felt certain he was being pushed to the side for
someone else, for de l'Orme was as capricious as she was beautiful.
Grammont did not hesitate. At nightfall he rode to the Marais, where
de l'Orme lived, and scouted the area. In a square near her home he spot-
ted a man approaching on foot. Recognizing the Duc de Brissac, he imme-
diately knew that this man was to supplant him in the courtesan's bed.
Brissac seemed unhappy to see the count, and so Grammont approached
him hurriedly and said, "Brissac, my friend, you must do me a service of
the greatest importance: I have an appointment, for the first time, with a
girl who lives near this place; and as this visit is only to concert measures, I
shall make but a very short stay. Be so kind as to lend me your cloak, and
walk my horse a little, until I return; but above all, do not go far from this
place." Without waiting for an answer, Grammont took the duke's cloak
and handed him the bridle of his horse. Looking back, he saw that Brissac
was watching him, so he pretended to enter a house, slipped out through
the back, circled around, and reached de l'Orme's house without being
seen.greater effort is cherished
more dearly than what is
gained with little trouble.
As the proverb says:
'Prizes great cannot be
won unless some heavy
labor's done.'" • The
woman says: "If no great
prizes can be won unless
some heavy labor's done,
you must suffer the
exhaustion of many toils to
be able to attain the favors
you seek, since what you
ask for is a greater prize."
• The man says: "I give
you all the thanks that I
can express for so sagely
promising me your love
when I have performed
great toils. God forbid that
I or any other could win
the love of so worthy a
woman without first
attaining it by many
labors."
—ANDREAS CAPELLANUS
ON LOVE, TRANSLATED BY
P. G.WALSH
One day, [Saint-Preuil]
pleaded more than usual
that [Madame de la
Maisonfort] grant him the
ultimate favors a woman
could offer, and he went
beyond just words in his
pleading. Madame, saying
he had gone way too far,
ordered him to never ever
appear before her again.
He left her room. Only an
hour later, the lady was
taking her customary walk
along one of those beautiful
canals at Bagnolet, when
Saint-Preuil leapt out from
behind a hedge, totally
naked, and standing before
his mistress in this state, he
cried out, "For the last
time, Madame—
Goodbye!" Thereupon, he
threw himself into the
canal, head first. The lady,
terrified by such a sight,
