The Coquette • 77
maintaining aloofness, Coquettes start a competition to win their favor. If
the ability to use third parties to make targets jealous is a critical seductive
skill, Sigmund Freud was a grand Coquette.
All of the tactics of the Coquette have been adapted by political leaders
to make the public fall in love. While exciting the masses, these leaders re-
main inwardly detached, which keeps them in control. The political scientist
Roberto Michels has even referred to such politicians as Cold Coquettes.
Napoleon played the Coquette with the French: after the grand successes of
the Italian campaign had made him a beloved hero, he left France to con-
quer Egypt, knowing that in his absence the government would fall apart,
the people would hunger for his return, and their love would serve as the
base for an expansion of his power. After exciting the masses with a rousing
speech, Mao Zedong would disappear from sight for days on end, making
himself an object of cultish worship. And no one was more of a Coquette
than Yugoslav leader Josef Tito, who alternated between distance from and
emotional identification with his people. All of these political leaders were
confirmed narcissists. In times of trouble, when people feel insecure, the ef-
fect of such political coquetry is even more powerful. It is important to real-
ize that coquetry is extremely effective on a group, stimulating jealousy, love,
and intense devotion. If you play such a role with a group, remember to
keep an emotional and physical distance. This will allow you to cry and
laugh on command, project self-sufficiency, and with such detachment you
will be able play people's emotions like a piano.
Symbol: The
Shadow. It cannot be grasped. Chase
your shadow and it will flee; turn your back on
it and it will follow you. It is also a person's dark side,
the thing that makes them mysterious. After they have given
us pleasure, the shadow of their withdrawal makes us yearn
for their return, much as clouds make us yearn for the sun.
78 • The Art of Seduction
Dangers
Coquettes face an obvious danger: they play with volatile emotions.
Every time the pendulum swings, love shifts to hate. So they must or-
chestrate everything carefully. Their absences cannot be too long, their
bouts of anger must be quickly followed by smiles. Coquettes can keep
their victims emotionally entrapped for a long time, but over months or
years the dynamic can begin to prove tiresome. Jiang Qing, later known as
Madame Mao, used coquettish skills to capture the heart of Mao Tse-tung,
but after ten years the quarreling, the tears and the coolness became in-
tensely irritating, and once irritation proved stronger than love, Mao was
able to detach. Josephine, a more brilliant Coquette, was able to adapt, by
spending a whole year without playing coy or withdrawing from Napoleon.
Timing is everything. On the other hand, though, the Coquette stirs up
powerful emotions, and breakups often prove temporary. The Coquette is
addictive: after the failure of the social plan Mao called the Great Leap For-
ward, Madame Mao was able to reestablish her power over her devastated
husband.
The Cold Coquette can stimulate a particularly deep hatred. Valerie
Solanas was a young woman who fell under Andy Warhol's spell. She had
written a play that amused him, and she was given the impression he might
turn it into a film. She imagined becoming a celebrity. She also got in-
volved in the feminist movement, and when, in June 1968, it dawned on
her that Warhol was toying with her, she directed her growing rage at men
on him and shot him three times, nearly killing him. Cold Coquettes may
stimulate feelings that are not so much erotic as intellectual, less passion and
more fascination. The hatred they can stir up is all the more insidious and
dangerous, for it may not be counterbalanced by a deep love. They must
realize the limits of the game, and the disturbing effects they can have on
less stable people.
