22 • The Art of Seduction
Introduced to D'Annunzio by their husbands, these duchesses and mar-
chionesses would find themselves entertaining this strange-looking man,
and when he was alone with them, his manner would suddenly change.
Within minutes these ladies would be spellbound. First, he had the most
magnificent voice they had ever heard—soft and low, each syllable articu-
lated, with a flowing rhythm and inflection that was almost musical. One
woman compared it to the ringing of church bells in the distance. Others
said his voice had a "hypnotic" effect. The words that voice spoke were in-
teresting as well—alliterative phrases, charming locutions, poetic images,
and a way of offering praise that could melt a woman's heart. D'Annunzio
had mastered the art of flattery. He seemed to know each woman's weak-
ness: one he would call a goddess of nature, another an incomparable artist
in the making, another a romantic figure out of a novel. A woman's heart
would flutter as he described the effect she had on him. Everything was
suggestive, hinting at sex or romance. That night she would ponder his
words, recalling little in particular that he had said, because he never said
anything concrete, but rather the feeling it had given her. The next day she
would receive from him a poem that seemed to have been written spe-
cifically for her. (In fact he wrote dozens of very similar poems, slightly
tailoring each one for its intended victim.)
A few years after D'Annunzio began work as a society reporter, he mar-
ried the daughter of the Duke and Duchess of Gallese. Shortly thereafter,
with the unshakeable support of society ladies, he began publishing novels
and books of poetry. The number of his conquests was remarkable, and
also the quality—not only marchionesses would fall at his feet, but great
artists, such as the actress Eleanor Duse, who helped him become a re-
spected dramatist and literary celebrity. The dancer Isadora Duncan, an-
other who eventually fell under his spell, explained his magic: "Perhaps the
most remarkable lover of our time is Gabriele D'Annunzio. And this
notwithstanding that he is small, bald, and, except when his face lights up
with enthusiasm, ugly But when he speaks to a woman he likes, his face is
transfigured, so that he suddenly becomes Apollo. . . . His effect on women
is remarkable. The lady he is talking to suddenly feels that her very soul and
being are lifted."
At the outbreak of World War I, the fifty-two-year-old D'Annunzio
joined the army. Although he had no military experience, he had a flair for
the dramatic and a burning desire to prove his bravery. He learned to fly
and led dangerous but highly effective missions. By the end of the war, he
was Italy's most decorated hero. His exploits made him a beloved national
figure, and after the war, crowds would gather outside his hotel wherever in
Italy he went. He would address them from a balcony, discussing politics,
railing against the current Italian government. A witness of one of these
speeches, the American writer Walter Starkie, was initially disappointed at
the appearance of the famous D'Annunzio on a balcony in Venice; he was
short, and looked grotesque. "Little by little, however, I began to sink under
the fascination of the voice, which penetrated into my consciousness. . . .His very successes in love,
even more than the
marvellous voice of this
little, bald seducer with a
nose like Punch, swept
along in his train a whole
procession of enamoured
women, both opulent and
tormented. D'Annunzio
had successfully revived the
Byronic legend: as he
passed by full-breasted
women, standing in his
way as Boldoni would
paint them, strings of
pearls anchoring them to
life—princesses and
actresses, great Russian
ladies and even middle-
class Bordeaux
housewives—they would
offer themselves up to him.
—PHILIPPE JULLIAN, PRINCE OF
AESTHETES: COUNT ROBERT
DE MONTESQUIEOU, TRANSLATED
BY JOHN HAYLOCK AND FRANCIS
KING
In short, nothing is so
sweet as to triumph over
the Resistance of a
beautiful Person; and in
that I have the Ambition
of Conquerors, who fly
perpetually from Victory to
Victory and can never
prevail with themselves to
put a bound to their
Wishes. Nothing can
restrain the Impetuosity of
my Desires; I have an
Heart for the whole Earth;
and like Alexander, I could
wish for New Worlds
wherein to extend my
Amorous Conquests.
—MOLIÈRE, DON JOHN OR
THE LIBERTINE, TRANSLATED BY
JOHN OZELL
The Rake • 23
Never a hurried, jerky gesture. . . . He played upon the emotions of the
crowd as a supreme violinist does upon a Stradivarius. The eyes of the
thousands were fixed upon him as though hypnotized by his power." Once
again, it was the sound of the voice and the poetic connotations of the
words that seduced the masses. Arguing that modern Italy should reclaim
the greatness of the Roman Empire, D'Annunzio would craft slogans for
the audience to repeat, or would ask emotionally loaded questions for them
to answer. He flattered the crowd, made them feel they were part of some
drama. Everything was vague and suggestive.
The issue of the day was the ownership of the city of Fiume, just across
the border in neighboring Yugoslavia. Many Italians believed that Italy's re-
ward for siding with the Allies in the recent war should be the annexation
of Fiume. D'Annunzio championed this cause, and because of his status as
a war hero the army was ready to side with him, although the government
opposed any action. In September of 1919, with soldiers rallying around
him, D'Annunzio led his infamous march on Fiume. When an Italian gen-
eral stopped him along the way, and threatened to shoot him, D'Annunzio
opened his coat to show his medals, and said in his magnetic voice, "If you
must kill me, fire first on this!" The general stood there stunned, then
broke into tears. He joined up with D'Annunzio.
When D'Annunzio entered Fiume, he was greeted as a liberator. The
next day he was declared leader of the Free State of Fiume. Soon he was
giving daily speeches from a balcony overlooking the town's main square,
holding tens of thousands of people spellbound without benefit of loud-
speakers. He initiated all kinds of celebrations and rituals harking back to
the Roman Empire. The citizens of Fiume began to imitate him, particu-
larly his sexual exploits; the city became like a giant bordello. His popu-
larity was so high that the Italian government feared a march on Rome,
which at that point, had D'Annunzio decided to do it—and he had the
support of a large part of the military—might actually have succeeded;
D'Annunzio could have beaten Mussolini to the punch and changed the
course of history. (He was not a Fascist, but a kind of aesthetic socialist.)
He decided to stay in Fiume, however, and ruled there for sixteen months
before the Italian government finally bombed him out of the city.
Seduction is a psychological process that transcends gender, except in a few
key areas where each gender has its own weakness. The male is traditionally
vulnerable to the visual. The Siren who can concoct the right physical ap-
pearance will seduce in large numbers. For women the weakness is lan-
guage and words: as was written by one of D'Annunzio's victims, the
French actress Simone, "How can one explain his conquests except by his
extraordinary verbal power, and the musical timbre of his voice, put to the
service of exceptional eloquence? For my sex is susceptible to words, be-
witched by them, longing to be dominated by them."
The Rake is as promiscuous with words as he is with women. He
chooses words for their ability to suggest, insinuate, hypnotize, elevate, in-Among the many modes of
handling Don Juan's effect
on women, the motif of the
irresistible hero is worth
singling out, for it
illustrates a curious change
in our sensibility. Don
Juan did not become
irresistible to women until
the Romantic age, and I
am disposed to think that
it is a trait of the female
imagination to make him
so. When the female voice
began to assert itself and
even, perhaps, to dominate
in literature, Don Juan
evolved to become the
women's rather than the
man's ideal. . . . Don
Juan is now the woman's
dream of the perfect lover,
fugitive, passionate, daring.
He gives her the one
unforgettable moment, the
magnificent exaltation of
the flesh which is too often
denied her by the real
husband, who thinks that
men are gross and women
spiritual. To be the fatal
Don Juan may be the
dream of a few men; but to
meet him is the dream of
many women.
—OSCAR MANDEL,"THE
LEGEND OF DON JUAN," THE
THEATRE OF DON JUAN
