126 • The Art of Seduction
Jack's life had more to do with myth, magic, legend, saga,
and story than with political theory or political science.
—JACQUELINE KENNEDY, A WEEK AFTER JOHN KENNEDY'S DEATH
Keys to the Character
Seduction is a form of persuasion that seeks to bypass consciousness, stir-
ring the unconscious mind instead. The reason for this is simple: we are
so surrounded by stimuli that compete for our attention, bombarding us
with obvious messages, and by people who are overtly political and manipu-
lative, that we are rarely charmed or deceived by them. We have grown
increasingly cynical. Try to persuade a person by appealing to their con-
sciousness, by saying outright what you want, by showing all your cards, and
what hope do you have? You are just one more irritation to be tuned out.
To avoid this fate you must learn the art of insinuation, of reaching the
unconscious. The most eloquent expression of the unconscious is the
dream, which is intricately connected to myth; waking from a dream, we
are often haunted by its images and ambiguous messages. Dreams obsess us
because they mix the real and the unreal. They are filled with real charac-
ters, and often deal with real situations, yet they are delightfully irrational,
pushing realities to the extremes of delirium. If everything in a dream were
realistic, it would have no power over us; if everything were unreal, we
would feel less involved in its pleasures and fears. Its fusion of the two is
what makes it haunting. This is what Freud called the "uncanny": some-
thing that seems simultaneously strange and familiar.
We sometimes experience the uncanny in waking life—in a déjà vu, a
miraculous coincidence, a weird event that recalls a childhood experience.
People can have a similar effect. The gestures, the words, the very being of
men like Kennedy or Andy Warhol, for example, evoke both the real and
the unreal: we may not realize it (and how could we, really), but they are
like dream figures to us. They have qualities that anchor them in reality—
sincerity, playfulness, sensuality—but at the same time their aloofness, their
superiority, their almost surreal quality makes them seem like something
out of a movie.
These types have a haunting, obsessive effect on people. Whether in
public or in private, they seduce us, making us want to possess them both
physically and psychologically. But how can we possess a person from a
dream, or a movie star or political star, or even one of those real-life fasci-
nators, like a Warhol, who may cross our path? Unable to have them, we
become obsessed with them—they haunt our thoughts, our dreams, our
fantasies. We imitate them unconsciously. The psychologist Sandor Fer-
enczi calls this "introjection": another person becomes part of our ego, we
internalize their character. That is the insidious seductive power of a Star, a
power you can appropriate by making yourself into a cipher, a mix of the
real and the unreal. Most people are hopelessly banal; that is, far too real.The savage worships idols
of wood and stone; the
civilized man, idols of flesh
and blood.
—GEORGE BERNARD SHAW
When the eye's rays
encounter some clear, well-
polished object—be it
burnished steel or glass or
water, a brilliant stone, or
any other polished and
gleaming substance
having luster, glitter, and
sparkle . . . those rays of
the eye are reflected back,
and the observer then
beholds himself and
obtains an ocular vision of
his own person. This is
what you see when you
look into a mirror; in that
situation you are as it were
looking at yourself through
the eyes of another.
—IBN HAZM, THE RING OF
THE DOVE:A TREATISE ON THE
ART AND PRACTICE OF ARAB
LOVE, TRANSLATED BY A.J.
ARBERRY
The only important
constellation of collective
seduction produced by
modern times [is] that of
film stars or cinema
idols. . . . They were our
only myth in an age
incapable of generating
great myths or figures of
seduction comparable to
those of mythology or art. •
The cinema's power lives in
its myth. Its stones, its
psychological portraits,
its imagination or realism,
the meaningful impressions
it leaves—these are all
secondary. Only the myth
is powerful, and at the
heart of the
cinematographic myth lies
seduction—that of the
renowned seductive figure,
a man or woman (but
The Star • 127
What you need to do is etherealize yourself. Your words and actions seem
to come from your unconscious—have a certain looseness to them. You
hold yourself back, occasionally revealing a trait that makes people wonder
whether they really know you.
The Star is a creation of modern cinema. That is no surprise: film re-
creates the dream world. We watch a movie in the dark, in a semisomno-
lent state. The images are real enough, and to varying degrees depict
realistic situations, but they are projections, flickering lights, images—we
know they are not real. It as if we were watching someone else's dream. It
was the cinema, not the theater, that created the Star.
On a theater stage, actors are far away, lost in the crowd, too real in
their bodily presence. What enabled film to manufacture the Star was the
close-up, which suddenly separates actors from their contexts, filling your
mind with their image. The close-up seems to reveal something not
so much about the character they are playing but about themselves. We
glimpse something of Greta Garbo herself when we look so closely into
her face. Never forget this while fashioning yourself as a Star. First, you
must have such a large presence that you can fill your target's mind the way
a close-up fills the screen. You must have a style or presence that makes you
stand out from everyone else. Be vague and dreamlike, yet not distant or
absent—you don't want people to be unable to focus on or remember you.
They have to be seeing you in their minds when you're not there.
Second, cultivate a blank, mysterious face, the center that radiates Star-
ness. This allows people to read into you whatever they want to, imagining
they can see your character, even your soul. Instead of signaling moods and
emotions, instead of emoting or overemoting, the Star draws in interpreta-
tions. That is the obsessive power in the face of Garbo or Dietrich, or even
of Kennedy, who molded his expressions on James Dean's.
A living thing is dynamic and changing while an object or image is pas-
sive, but in its passivity it stimulates our fantasies. A person can gain that
power by becoming a kind of object. The great eighteenth-century charla-
tan Count Saint-Germain was in many ways a precursor of the Star. He
would suddenly appear in town, no one knew from where; he spoke many
languages, but his accent belonged to no single country. Nor was it clear
how old he was—not young, clearly, but his face had a healthy glow. The
count only went out at night. He always wore black, and also spectacular
jewels. Arriving at the court of Louis XV, he was an instant sensation; he
reeked wealth, but no one knew its source. He made the king and Madame
de Pompadour believe he had fantastic powers, including even the ability to
turn base matter into gold (the gift of the Philosopher's Stone), but he
never made any great claims for himself; it was all insinuation. He never
said yes or no, only perhaps. He would sit down for dinner but was never
seen eating. He once gave Madame de Pompadour a gift of candies in a
box that changed color and aspect depending on how she held it; this
entrancing object, she said, reminded her of the count himself. Saint-
Germain painted the strangest paintings anyone had ever seen—the colorsabove all a woman) linked
to the ravishing but
specious power of the
cinematographic image
itself. ...• The star is by
no means an ideal or
sublime being: she is
artificial. . . . Her presence
serves to submerge all
sensibility and expression
beneath a ritual fascination
with the void, beneath
ecstasy of her gaze and the
nullity of her smile. This is
how she achieves mythical
status and becomes subject
to collective rites of
sacrificial adulation. • The
ascension of the cinema
idols, the masses'
divinities, was and remains
a central story of modern
times. . . . There is no
point in dismissing it as
merely the dreams of
mystified masses. It is a
seductive occurrence. . . . •
To be sure, seduction in the
age of the masses is no
longer like that of. . . Les
Liaisons Dangereuses or
The Seducer's Diary, nor
for that matter, like that
found in ancient
mythology, which
undoubtedly contains the
stories richest in seduction.
In these seduction is hot,
while that of our modern
idols is cold, being at the
intersection of two cold
mediums, that of the image
and that of the
masses. ...• The great
stars or seductresses never
dazzle because of their
talent or intelligence, but
because of their absence.
They are dazzling in their
nullity, and in their
coldness—the coldness of
makeup and ritual
hieraticism. . . . • These
great seductive effigies are
our masks, our Eastern
Island statues.
—JEAN BAUDRILLARD,
SEDUCTION, TRANSLATED BY
BRIAN SINGER
