188 • The Art of Seduction
singing a love song. And now, suddenly, she changed: there was a roguish
look in her eye as she glanced at him. The angelic voice, the glances, the
energy animating her face, sent his mind reeling. He was confused. When
the same thing happened the next night, the prince decided to extend his
stay at the château.
In the days that followed, the prince and Madame Récamier took walks
together, rowed out on the lake, and attended dances, where he finally held
her in his arms. They would talk late into the night. But nothing grew clear
to him: she would seem so spiritual, so noble, and then there would be
a touch of the hand, a sudden flirtatious remark. After two weeks at the
château, the most eligible bachelor in Europe forgot all his libertine habits
and proposed marriage to Madame Récamier. He would convert to Catholi-
cism, her religion, and she would divorce her much older husband. (She
had told him her marriage had never been consummated and so the
Catholic church could annul it.) She would then come to live with him in
Prussia. Madame promised to do as he wished. The prince hurried off to
Prussia to seek the approval of his family, and Madame returned to Paris
to secure the required annulment. Auguste flooded her with love letters,
and waited. Time passed; he felt he was going mad. Then, finally, a letter:
she had changed her mind.
Some months later, Madame Récamier sent Auguste a gift: Gérard's fa-
mous painting of her reclining on a sofa. The prince spent hours in front of
it, trying to pierce the mystery behind her gaze. He had joined the com-
pany of her conquests—of men like the writer Benjamin Constant, who
said of her, "She was my last love. For the rest of my life I was like a tree
struck by lightning."
Interpretation. Madame Récamier's list of conquests became only more
impressive as she grew older: there was Prince Metternich, the Duke of
Wellington, the writers Constant and Chateaubriand. For all of these men
she was an obsession, which only increased in intensity when they were
away from her. The source of her power was twofold. First, she had an an-
gelic face, which drew men to her. It appealed to paternal instincts, charm-
ing with its innocence. But then there was a second quality peeking
through, in the flirtatious looks, the wild dancing, the sudden gaiety—all
these caught men off guard. Clearly there was more to her than they had
thought, an intriguing complexity. When alone, they would find them-
selves pondering these contradictions, as if a poison were coursing through
their blood. Madame Récamier was an enigma, a problem that had to be
solved. Whatever it was that you wanted, whether a coquettish she-devil or
an unattainable goddess, she could seem to be. She surely encouraged this
illusion by keeping her men at a certain distance, so they could never figure
her out. And she was the queen of the calculated effect, like her surprise
entrance at the Château de Coppet, which made her the center of atten-
tion, if only for a few seconds.unearthly bliss. Juliette was
an ange fatal, and much
more dangerous for looking
like an angel! The music
grew fainter. Suddenly, by
a deft trick, Juliette's
chestnut hair was loosened
and fell in clouds around
her. A little out of breath,
she disappeared into her
dimly lit boudoir. And
there the crowd followed
her and beheld her reclining
on her daybed in a loose
tea-gown, looking
fashionably pale, like
Gérard's Psyche, while her
maids cooled her brow with
toilet water.
—MARGARET TROUNCER,
MADAME RÉCAMIER
The idea that two distinct
elements are combined in
Mona Lisa's smile is one
that has struck several
critics. They accordingly
find in the beautiful
Florentine's expression the
most perfect representation
of the contrasts that
dominate the erotic life of
women; the contrast
between reserve and
seduction, and between the
most devoted tenderness
and a sensuality that is
ruthlessly demanding—
consuming men as if they
were alien beings.
—SIGMUND FREUD, LEONARDO
DA VINCI AND A MEMORY OF
HIS CHILDHOOD, TRANSLATED
BY ALAN TYSON
[Oscar Wilde's] hands
were fat and flabby; his
handshake lacked grip, and
at a first encounter one
recoiled from its plushy
limpness, but this aversion
was soon overcome when
he began to talk, for his
genuine kindliness and
desire to please made one
forget what was unpleasant
Send Mixed Signals • 189
The seductive process involves filling someone's mind with your image.
Your innocence, or your beauty, or your flirtatiousness can attract their at-
tention but not their obsession; they will soon move on to the next striking
image. To deepen their interest, you must hint at a complexity that cannot
be grasped in a week or two. You are an elusive mystery, an irresistible lure,
promising great pleasure if only it can be possessed. Once they begin to
fantasize about you, they are on the brink of the slippery slope of seduc-
tion, and will not be able to stop themselves from sliding down.
Artificial and Natural
The big Broadway hit of 1881 was Gilbert and Sullivan's operetta Pa-
tience, a satire on the bohemian world of aesthetes and dandies that had
become so fashionable in London. To cash in on this vogue, the operetta's
promoters decided to invite one of England's most infamous aesthetes to
America for a lecture tour: Oscar Wilde. Only twenty-seven at the time,
Wilde was more famous for his public persona than for his small body of
work. The American promoters were confident that their public would be
fascinated by this man, whom they imagined as always walking around with
a flower in his hand, but they did not expect it to last; he would do a few
lectures, then the novelty would wear off, and they would ship him home.
The money was good and Wilde accepted. On his arrival in New York, a
customs man asked him whether he had anything to declare: "I have noth-
ing to declare," he replied, "except my genius."
The invitations poured in—New York society was curious to meet this
oddity. Women found Wilde enchanting, but the newspapers were less
kind; The New York Times called him an "aesthetic sham." Then, a week af-
ter his arrival, he gave his first lecture. The hall was packed; more than a
thousand people came, many of them just to see what he looked like. They
were not disappointed. Wilde did not carry a flower, and was taller than
they had expected, but he had long flowing hair and wore a green velvet
suit and cravat, as well as knee breeches and silk stockings. Many in the au-
dience were put off; as they looked up at him from their seats, the combi-
nation of his large size and pretty attire were rather repulsive. Some people
openly laughed, others could not hide their unease. They expected to hate
the man. Then he began to speak.
The subject was the "English Renaissance," the "art for art's sake"
movement in late-nineteenth-century England. Wilde's voice proved hyp-
notic; he spoke in a kind of meter, mannered and artificial, and few really
understood what he was saying, but the speech was so witty, and it flowed.
His appearance was certainly strange, but overall, no New Yorker had ever
seen or heard such an intriguing man, and the lecture was a huge success.
Even the newspapers warmed up to it. In Boston a few weeks later, some
sixty Harvard boys had prepared an ambush: they would make fun of this
effeminate poet by dressing in knee breeches, carrying flowers, and ap-in his physical appearance
and contact, gave charm to
his manners, and grace to
his precision of speech. The
first sight of him affected
people in various ways.
Some could hardly restrain
their laughter, others felt
hostile, a few were afflicted
with the "creeps" many
were conscious of being
uneasy, but except for a
small minority who could
never recover from the first
sensation of distaste and so
kept out of his way, both
sexes found him irresistible,
and to the young men of
his time, says W. B. Yeats,
he was like a triumphant
and audacious figure from
another age.
—HESKETH PEARSON, OSCAR
WILDE: HIS LIFE AND WIT
Once upon a time there
was a magnet, and in its
close neighborhood lived
some steel filings. One day
two or three little filings felt
a sudden desire to go and
visit the magnet, and they
began to talk of what a
pleasant thing it would be
to do. Other filings nearby
overheard their
conversation, and they, too,
became infected with the
same desire. Still others
joined them, till at last all
the filings began to discuss
the matter, and more and
more their vague desire
grew into an impulse.
"Why not go today?" said
one of them; but others
were of opinion that it
would be better to wait
until tomorrow.
Meanwhile, without their
having noticed it, they had
been involuntarily moving
nearer to the magnet,
which lay there quite still,
apparently taking no heed
of them. And so they went
on discussing, all the time
