Send Mixed Signals • 189
The seductive process involves filling someone's mind with your image.
Your innocence, or your beauty, or your flirtatiousness can attract their at-
tention but not their obsession; they will soon move on to the next striking
image. To deepen their interest, you must hint at a complexity that cannot
be grasped in a week or two. You are an elusive mystery, an irresistible lure,
promising great pleasure if only it can be possessed. Once they begin to
fantasize about you, they are on the brink of the slippery slope of seduc-
tion, and will not be able to stop themselves from sliding down.
Artificial and Natural
The big Broadway hit of 1881 was Gilbert and Sullivan's operetta Pa-
tience, a satire on the bohemian world of aesthetes and dandies that had
become so fashionable in London. To cash in on this vogue, the operetta's
promoters decided to invite one of England's most infamous aesthetes to
America for a lecture tour: Oscar Wilde. Only twenty-seven at the time,
Wilde was more famous for his public persona than for his small body of
work. The American promoters were confident that their public would be
fascinated by this man, whom they imagined as always walking around with
a flower in his hand, but they did not expect it to last; he would do a few
lectures, then the novelty would wear off, and they would ship him home.
The money was good and Wilde accepted. On his arrival in New York, a
customs man asked him whether he had anything to declare: "I have noth-
ing to declare," he replied, "except my genius."
The invitations poured in—New York society was curious to meet this
oddity. Women found Wilde enchanting, but the newspapers were less
kind; The New York Times called him an "aesthetic sham." Then, a week af-
ter his arrival, he gave his first lecture. The hall was packed; more than a
thousand people came, many of them just to see what he looked like. They
were not disappointed. Wilde did not carry a flower, and was taller than
they had expected, but he had long flowing hair and wore a green velvet
suit and cravat, as well as knee breeches and silk stockings. Many in the au-
dience were put off; as they looked up at him from their seats, the combi-
nation of his large size and pretty attire were rather repulsive. Some people
openly laughed, others could not hide their unease. They expected to hate
the man. Then he began to speak.
The subject was the "English Renaissance," the "art for art's sake"
movement in late-nineteenth-century England. Wilde's voice proved hyp-
notic; he spoke in a kind of meter, mannered and artificial, and few really
understood what he was saying, but the speech was so witty, and it flowed.
His appearance was certainly strange, but overall, no New Yorker had ever
seen or heard such an intriguing man, and the lecture was a huge success.
Even the newspapers warmed up to it. In Boston a few weeks later, some
sixty Harvard boys had prepared an ambush: they would make fun of this
effeminate poet by dressing in knee breeches, carrying flowers, and ap-in his physical appearance
and contact, gave charm to
his manners, and grace to
his precision of speech. The
first sight of him affected
people in various ways.
Some could hardly restrain
their laughter, others felt
hostile, a few were afflicted
with the "creeps" many
were conscious of being
uneasy, but except for a
small minority who could
never recover from the first
sensation of distaste and so
kept out of his way, both
sexes found him irresistible,
and to the young men of
his time, says W. B. Yeats,
he was like a triumphant
and audacious figure from
another age.
—HESKETH PEARSON, OSCAR
WILDE: HIS LIFE AND WIT
Once upon a time there
was a magnet, and in its
close neighborhood lived
some steel filings. One day
two or three little filings felt
a sudden desire to go and
visit the magnet, and they
began to talk of what a
pleasant thing it would be
to do. Other filings nearby
overheard their
conversation, and they, too,
became infected with the
same desire. Still others
joined them, till at last all
the filings began to discuss
the matter, and more and
more their vague desire
grew into an impulse.
"Why not go today?" said
one of them; but others
were of opinion that it
would be better to wait
until tomorrow.
Meanwhile, without their
having noticed it, they had
been involuntarily moving
nearer to the magnet,
which lay there quite still,
apparently taking no heed
of them. And so they went
on discussing, all the time
190 • The Art of Seduction
plauding far too loudly at his entrance. Wilde was not the least bit flustered.
The audience laughed hysterically at his improvised comments, and when
the boys heckled him he kept his dignity, betraying no anger at all. Once
again, the contrast between his manner and his physical appearance made
him seem rather extraordinary. Many were deeply impressed, and Wilde
was well on his way to becoming a sensation.
The short lecture tour turned into a cross-country affair. In San Fran-
cisco, this visiting lecturer on art and aesthetics proved able to drink every-
one under the table and play poker, which made him the hit of the season.
On his way back from the West Coast, Wilde was to make stops in Colo-
rado, and was warned that if the pretty-boy poet dared to show up in the
mining town of Leadville, he would be hung from the highest tree. It was
an invitation Wilde could not refuse. Arriving in Leadville, he ignored the
hecklers and nasty looks; he toured the mines, drank and played cards, then
lectured on Botticelli and Cellini in the saloons. Like everyone else, the
miners fell under his spell, even naming a mine after him. One cowboy was
heard to say, "That fellow is some art guy, but he can drink any of us under
the table and afterwards carry us home two at a time."
Interpretation. In a fable he improvised at dinner once, Oscar Wilde talked
about some steel filings that had a sudden desire to visit a nearby magnet.
As they talked to each other about this, they found themselves moving
closer to the magnet without realizing how or why. Finally they were swept
in one mass to the magnet's side. "Then the magnet smiled—for the steel
filings had no doubt at all but that they were paying that visit of their
own free will." Such was the effect that Wilde himself had on everyone
around him.
Wilde's attractiveness was more than just a by-product of his character,
it was quite calculated. An adorer of paradox, he consciously played up his
own weirdness and ambiguity, the contrast between his mannered appear-
ance and his witty, effortless performance. Naturally warm and sponta-
neous, he constructed an image that ran counter to his nature. People were
repelled, confused, intrigued, and finally drawn to this man who seemed
impossible to figure out.
Paradox is seductive because it plays with meaning. We are secretly op-
pressed by the rationality in our lives, where everything is meant to mean
something; seduction, by contrast, thrives on ambiguity, on mixed signals,
on anything that eludes interpretation. Most people are painfully obvious.
If their character is showy, we may be momentarily attracted, but the at-
traction wears off; there is no depth, no contrary motion, to pull us in. The
key to both attracting and holding attention is to radiate mystery. And no
one is naturally mysterious, at least not for long; mystery is something you
have to work at, a ploy on your part, and something that must be used early
on in the seduction. Let one part of your character show, so everyone no-
tices it. (In the example of Wilde, this was the mannered affectation con-insensibly drawing nearer
to their neighbor; and the
more they talked, the more
they felt the impulse
growing stronger, till the
more impatient ones
declared that they would go
that day, whatever the rest
did. Some were heard to
say that it was their duty
to visit the magnet, and
they ought to have gone
long ago. And, while they
talked, they moved always
nearer and nearer, without
realizing that they had
moved. Then, at last, the
impatient ones prevailed,
and, with one irresistible
impulse, the whole body
cried out, "There is no use
waiting. We will go today.
We will go now. We will
go at once." And then in
one unanimous mass they
swept along, and in
another moment were
clinging fast to the magnet
on every side. Then the
magnet smiled—for the
steel filings had no doubt
at all but that they were
paying that visit of their
own free will.
—OSCAR WILDE, AS QUOTED BY
RICHARD LE GALLIENNE IN
HESKETH PEARSON, OSCAR
WILDE: HIS LIFE AND WIT
Now that the bohort
[impromptu joust] was over
and the knights were
dispersing and each making
his way to where his
thoughts inclined him, it
chanced that Rivalin was
heading for where lovely
Blancheflor was sitting.
Seeing this, he galloped up
to her and looking her in
the eyes saluted her most
pleasantly. • "God save
you, lovely woman!" •
"Thank you," said the
girl, and continued very
bashfully, "may God
Almighty, who makes all
hearts glad, gladden your
heart and mind! And my
