The Anti-Seducer • 141
the voice of Nakanokimi, whom he had loved as well. Tears welled up in
his eyes.
A few months later Kaoru managed to find the house in the mountains
where Ukifune lived. He visited her there, and she did not disappoint. "I
once had a glimpse of you through a crack in a door," he told her, and
"you have been very much on my mind ever since." Then he picked her up
in his arms and carried her to a waiting carriage. He was taking her back to
the shrine, and the journey there brought back to him the image of
Oigimi; again his eyes clouded with tears. Looking at Ukifune, he silently
compared her to Oigimi—her clothes were less nice but she had beautiful
hair.
When Oigimi was alive, she and Kaoru had played the koto together,
so once at the shrine he had kotos brought out. Ukifune did not play as
well as Oigimi had, and her manners were less refined. Not to worry—he
would give her lessons, change her into a lady. But then, as he had done
with Oigimi, Kaoru returned to court, leaving Ukifune languishing at the
shrine. Some time passed before he visited her again; she had improved,
was more beautiful than before, but he could not stop thinking of Oigimi.
Once again he left her, promising to bring her to court, but more weeks
passed, and finally he received the news that Ukifune had disappeared, last
seen heading toward a river. She had most likely committed suicide.
At the funeral ceremony for Ukifune, Kaoru was wracked with guilt:
why had he not come for her earlier? She deserved a better fate.
Kaoru and the others appear in the eleventh-century Japanese novel The
Tale of Genji, by the noblewoman Murasaki Shikibu. The characters are
based on people the author knew, but Kaoru's type appears in every culture
and period: these are men and women who seem to be searching for an
ideal partner. The one they have is never quite right; at first glance a person
excites them, but they soon see faults, and when a new person crosses their
path, he or she looks better and the first person is forgotten. These types
often try to work on the imperfect mortal who has excited them, to im-
prove them culturally and morally. But this proves extremely unsatisfactory
for both parties.
The truth about this type is not that they are searching for an ideal
but that they are hopelessly unhappy with themselves. You may mistake
their dissatisfaction for a perfectionist's high standards, but in point of fact
nothing will really satisfy them, for their unhappiness is deep-rooted. You
can recognize them by their past, which will be littered with short-lived,
stormy romances. Also, they will tend to compare you to others, and to try
to remake you. You may not realize at first what you have gotten into, but
people like this will eventually prove hopelessly anti-seductive because they
cannot see your individual qualities. Cut the romance off before it happens.
These types are closet sadists and will torture you with their unreachable
goals.
142 • The Art of Seduction
5. In 1762, in the city of Turin, Italy, Giovanni Giacomo Casanova made
the acquaintance of one Count A.B., a Milanese gentleman who seemed to
like him enormously. The count had fallen on hard times and Casanova
lent him some money. In gratitude, the count invited Casanova to stay with
him and his wife in Milan. His wife, he said, was from Barcelona, and was
admired far and wide for her beauty. He showed Casanova her letters,
which had an intriguing wit; Casanova imagined her as a prize worth se-
ducing. He went to Milan.
Arriving at the house of Count A.B., Casanova found that the Spanish
lady was certainly beautiful, but that she was also quiet and serious. Some-
thing about her bothered him. As he was unpacking his clothes, the count-
ess saw a stunning red dress, trimmed with sable, among his belongings. It
was a gift, Casanova explained, for any Milanese lady who won his heart.
The following evening at dinner, the countess was suddenly more
friendly, teasing and bantering with Casanova. She described the dress as a
bribe—he would use it to persuade a woman to give in to him. On the
contrary, said Casanova, he only gave gifts afterward, as tokens of his appre-
ciation. That evening, in a carriage on the way back from the opera, she
asked him if a wealthy friend of hers could buy the dress, and when he said
no, she was clearly vexed. Sensing her game, Casanova offered to give her
the sable dress if she was kind to him. This only made her angry, and they
quarreled.
Finally Casanova had had enough of the countess's moods: he sold the
dress for 15,000 francs to her wealthy friend, who in turn gave it to her, as
she had planned all along. But to prove his lack of interest in money,
Casanova told the countess he would give her the 15,000 francs, no strings
attached. "You are a very bad man," she said, "but you can stay, you amuse
me." She resumed her coquettish manner, but Casanova was not fooled. "It
is not my fault, madame, if your charms have so little power over me," he
told her. "Here are 15,000 francs to console you." He laid the money on a
table and walked out, leaving the countess fuming and vowing revenge.
When Casanova first met the Spanish lady, two things about her repelled
him. First, her pride: rather than engaging in the give-and-take of seduc-
tion, she demanded a man's subjugation. Pride can reflect self-assurance,
signaling that you will not abase yourself before others. Just as often,
though, it stems from an inferiority complex, which demands that others
abase themselves before you. Seduction requires an openness to the other
person, a willingness to bend and adapt. Excessive pride, without anything
to justify it, is highly anti-seductive.
The second quality that disgusted Casanova was the countess's greed:
her coquettish little games were designed only to get the dress—she had no
interest in romance. For Casanova, seduction was a lighthearted game that
people played for their mutual amusement. In his scheme of things, it was
fine if a woman wanted money and gifts as well; he could understand that
desire, and he was a generous man. But he also felt that this was a desire a
