
The Ardent Rake
For the court of Louis XIV, the king's last years were gloomy—he was
old, and had become both insufferably religious and personally unpleas-
ant. The court was bored and desperate for novelty. So in 1710, the arrival
of a fifteen-year-old lad who was both devilishly handsome and charming
had a particularly strong effect on the ladies. His name was Fronsac, the
future Duke de Richelieu (his granduncle being the infamous Cardinal
Richelieu). He was impudent and witty. The ladies would play with him
like a toy, but he would kiss them on the lips in return, his hands wandering
far for an inexperienced boy. When those hands strayed up the skirts of a
duchess who was not so indulgent, the king was furious, and sent the youth
to the Bastille to teach him a lesson. But the ladies who had found him so
amusing could not endure his absence. Compared to the stiffs in court, here
was someone incredibly bold, his eyes boring into you, his hands quicker
than was safe. Nothing could stop him, his novelty was irresistible. The
court ladies pleaded and his stay in the Bastille was cut short.
Several years later, the young Mademoiselle de Valois was walking in a
Paris park with her chaperone, an older woman who never left her side. De
Valois's father, the Duke d'Orléans, was determined to protect her, his
youngest daughter, from all the court seducers until she could be married
off, so he had attached to her this chaperone, a woman of impeccable
virtue and sourness. In the park, however, de Valois saw a young man who
gave her a look that set her heart on fire. He walked on by, but the look was
intense and clear. It was her chaperone who told her his name: the now in-
famous Duke de Richelieu, blasphemer, seducer, heartbreaker. Someone to
avoid at all cost.
A few days later, the chaperone took de Valois to a different park, and
lo and behold, Richelieu crossed their path again. This time he was in dis-
guise, dressed as a beggar, but the look in his eye was unforgettable. Made-
moiselle de Valois returned his gaze: at last something exciting in her drab
life. Given her father's sternness, no man had dared approach her. And now
this notorious courtier was pursuing her, instead of all the other ladies at
court—what a thrill! Soon he was smuggling beautifully written notes to
her expressing his uncontrollable desire for her. She responded timidly, but
soon the notes were all she was living for. In one of them he promised to
arrange everything if she would spend the night with him; imagining it was[After an accident at sect,
Don Juan finds himself
washed up on a beach,
where he is discovered by a
young woman.] • TISBEA:
Wake up, handsomest of
all men, and be yourself
again. • DON JUAN: If the
sea gives me death, you
give me life. But the sea
really saved me only to be
killed by you. Oh the sea
tosses me from one torment
to the other, for I no sooner
pulled myself from the
water than I met this
siren—yourself. Why fill
my ears with wax, since
you kill me with your
eyes? I was dying in the
sea, but from today I shall
die of love. • TISBEA: YOU
have abundant breath for a
man almost drowned. You
suffered much, but who
knows what suffering you
are preparing for me? . . .
I found you at my feet all
water, and now you are all
fire. If you burn when you
are so wet, what will you
do when you're dry again?
You promise a scorching
flame; I hope to God
you're not lying. • DON
JUAN: Dear girl, God
should have drowned me
before I could be charred by
you. Perhaps love was wise
19
