The Ardent Rake
For the court of Louis XIV, the king's last years were gloomy—he was
old, and had become both insufferably religious and personally unpleas-
ant. The court was bored and desperate for novelty. So in 1710, the arrival
of a fifteen-year-old lad who was both devilishly handsome and charming
had a particularly strong effect on the ladies. His name was Fronsac, the
future Duke de Richelieu (his granduncle being the infamous Cardinal
Richelieu). He was impudent and witty. The ladies would play with him
like a toy, but he would kiss them on the lips in return, his hands wandering
far for an inexperienced boy. When those hands strayed up the skirts of a
duchess who was not so indulgent, the king was furious, and sent the youth
to the Bastille to teach him a lesson. But the ladies who had found him so
amusing could not endure his absence. Compared to the stiffs in court, here
was someone incredibly bold, his eyes boring into you, his hands quicker
than was safe. Nothing could stop him, his novelty was irresistible. The
court ladies pleaded and his stay in the Bastille was cut short.
Several years later, the young Mademoiselle de Valois was walking in a
Paris park with her chaperone, an older woman who never left her side. De
Valois's father, the Duke d'Orléans, was determined to protect her, his
youngest daughter, from all the court seducers until she could be married
off, so he had attached to her this chaperone, a woman of impeccable
virtue and sourness. In the park, however, de Valois saw a young man who
gave her a look that set her heart on fire. He walked on by, but the look was
intense and clear. It was her chaperone who told her his name: the now in-
famous Duke de Richelieu, blasphemer, seducer, heartbreaker. Someone to
avoid at all cost.
A few days later, the chaperone took de Valois to a different park, and
lo and behold, Richelieu crossed their path again. This time he was in dis-
guise, dressed as a beggar, but the look in his eye was unforgettable. Made-
moiselle de Valois returned his gaze: at last something exciting in her drab
life. Given her father's sternness, no man had dared approach her. And now
this notorious courtier was pursuing her, instead of all the other ladies at
court—what a thrill! Soon he was smuggling beautifully written notes to
her expressing his uncontrollable desire for her. She responded timidly, but
soon the notes were all she was living for. In one of them he promised to
arrange everything if she would spend the night with him; imagining it was[After an accident at sect,
Don Juan finds himself
washed up on a beach,
where he is discovered by a
young woman.] • TISBEA:
Wake up, handsomest of
all men, and be yourself
again. • DON JUAN: If the
sea gives me death, you
give me life. But the sea
really saved me only to be
killed by you. Oh the sea
tosses me from one torment
to the other, for I no sooner
pulled myself from the
water than I met this
siren—yourself. Why fill
my ears with wax, since
you kill me with your
eyes? I was dying in the
sea, but from today I shall
die of love. • TISBEA: YOU
have abundant breath for a
man almost drowned. You
suffered much, but who
knows what suffering you
are preparing for me? . . .
I found you at my feet all
water, and now you are all
fire. If you burn when you
are so wet, what will you
do when you're dry again?
You promise a scorching
flame; I hope to God
you're not lying. • DON
JUAN: Dear girl, God
should have drowned me
before I could be charred by
you. Perhaps love was wise
19
20 • The Art of Seduction
impossible to bring such a thing to pass, she did not mind playing along and
agreeing to his bold proposal.
Mademoiselle de Valois had a chambermaid named Angelique, who
dressed her for bed and slept in an adjoining room. One night as the chap-
erone was knitting, de Valois looked up from the book she was reading to
see Angelique carrying her mistress's nightclothes to her room, but for some
strange reason Angelique looked back at her and smiled—it was Richelieu,
expertly dressed as the maid! De Valois nearly gasped from fright, but caught
herself, realizing the danger she was in: if she said anything her family
would find out about the notes, and about her part in the whole affair.
What could she do? She decided to go to her room and talk the young
duke out of his ridiculously dangerous maneuver. She said good night to her
chaperone, but once she was in her bedroom, the words she had planned
were useless. When she tried to reason with Richelieu, he responded with
that look in his eye, and then with his arms around her. She could not yell,
but now she was unsure what to do. His impetuous words, his caresses, the
danger of it all—her head was whirling, she was lost. What was virtue and
her prior boredom compared to an evening with the court's most notorious
rake? So while the chaperone knitted away, the duke initiated her into the
rituals of libertinage.
Months later, de Valois's father had reason to suspect that Richelieu had
broken through his lines of defense. The chaperone was fired, the precau-
tions were doubled. D'Orléans did not realize that to Richelieu such mea-
sures were a challenge, and he lived for challenges. He bought the house
next door under an assumed name and secretly tunneled a trapdoor through
the wall adjoining the duke's kitchen cupboard. In this cupboard, over the
next few months—until the novelty wore off—de Valois and Richelieu en-
joyed endless trysts.
Everyone in Paris knew of Richelieu's exploits, for he made it a point
to publicize them as loudly as possible. Every week a new story would cir-
culate through the court. A husband had locked his wife in an upstairs
room at night, worried the duke was after her; to reach her the duke had
crawled in darkness along a thin wooden plank suspended between two
upper-floor windows. Two women who lived in the same house, one a
widow, the other married and quite religious, had discovered to their mu-
tual horror that the duke was having an affair with both of them at the
same time, leaving one in the middle of the night to be with the other.
When they confronted him, the duke, always on the prowl for something
novel, and a devilish talker, had neither apologized nor backed down, but
proceeded to talk them into a menage a trois, playing on the wounded
vanity of each woman, who could not stand the thought of him preferring
the other. Year after year, the stories of his remarkable seductions spread.
One woman admired his audacity and bravery, another his gallantry in
thwarting a husband. Women competed for his attention: if he did not
want to seduce you, there had to be something wrong with you. To be the
target of his attentions became a great fantasy. At one point two ladiesto drench me before I felt
your scalding touch. But
your fire is such that even
in water I burn. • TISBEA:
So cold and yet burning? •
DON JUAN: So much fire
is in you. • TISBEA: How
well you talk! • DON
JUAN: How well you
understand! • TISBEA: I
hope to God you're not
lying.
—TIRSO DE MOLINA, THE
PLAYBOY OF SEVILLE,
TRANSLATED BY ADRIENNE M.
SCHIZZANO AND OSCAR
MANDEL
Pleased with my first
success, I determined to
profit by this happy
reconciliation. I called them
my dear wives, my faithful
companions, the two beings
chosen to make me happy.
I sought to turn their
heads, and to rouse in
them desires the strength of
which I knew and which
would drive away any
reflections contrary to my
plans. The skillful man
who knows how to
communicate gradually the
heat of love to the senses of
the most virtuous woman
is quite certain of soon
being absolute master of
her mind and her person;
you cannot reflect when
you have lost your head;
and, moreover, principles of
wisdom, however deeply
engraved they may be on
the mind, are effaced in
that moment when the
heart yearns only for
pleasure: pleasure alone
then commands and is
obeyed. The man who has
had experience of conquests
nearly always succeeds
where he who is only timid
and in love fails. . . . •
When I had brought my
two belles to the state of
abandonment in which I
