138 • The Art of Seduction
laughed and thought to himself how differently he would manage affairs if
he were the one wooing the lovely Madame.
Over the next few days Matta continued to misread the signs. He did
not pay a visit to Madame de Senantes's husband, as custom required. He
did not wear her colors. When the two went riding together, he went chas-
ing after hares, as if they were the more interesting prey, and when he took
snuff he failed to offer her some. Meanwhile he continued to make his
overforward advances. Finally Madame had had enough, and complained to
him directly. Matta apologized; he had not realized his errors. Moved by his
apology, the lady was more than ready to resume the courtship—but a few
days later, after a few trifling stabs at wooing, Matta once again assumed
that she was ready for bed. To his dismay, she refused him as before. "I do
not think that [women] can be mightily offended," Matta told the cheva-
lier, "if one sometimes leaves off trifling, to come to the point." But
Madame de Senantes would have nothing more to do with him, and the
Chevalier de Grammont, seeing an opportunity he could not pass by, took
advantage of her displeasure by secretly courting her properly, and eventu-
ally winning the favors that Matta had tried to force.
There is nothing more anti-seductive than feeling that someone has assumed
that you are theirs, that you cannot possibly resist them. The slightest ap-
pearance of this kind of conceit is deadly to seduction; you must prove
yourself, take your time, win your target's heart. Perhaps you fear that he or
she will be offended by a slower pace, or will lose interest. It is more likely,
however, that your fear reflects your own insecurity, and insecurity is always
anti-seductive. In truth, the longer you take, the more you show the depth
of your interest, and the deeper the spell you create.
In a world of few formalities and ceremony, seduction is one of the few
remnants from the past that retains the ancient patterns. It is a ritual, and its
rites must be observed. Haste reveals not the depth of your feelings but the
degree of your self-absorption. It may be possible sometimes to hurry
someone into love, but you will only be repaid by the lack of pleasure this
kind of love affords. If you are naturally impetuous, do what you can to
disguise it. Strangely enough, the effort you spend on holding yourself
back may be read by your target as deeply seductive.
3. In Paris in the 1730s lived a young man named Meilcour, who was just
of an age to have his first affair. His mother's friend Madame de Lursay, a
widow of around forty, was beautiful and charming, but had a reputation
for being untouchable; as a boy, Meilcour had been infatuated with her, but
never expected his love would be returned. So it was with great surprise
and excitement that he realized that now that he was old enough, Madame
de Lursay's tender looks seemed to indicate a more than motherly interest
in him.Just as ladies do love men
which be valiant and bold
under arms, so likewise do
they love such as be of like
sort in love; and the man
which is cowardly and over
and above respectful toward
them, will never win their
good favor. Not that they
would have them so
overweening, bold, and
presumptuous, as that they
should by main force lay
them on the floor; but
rather they desire in them a
certain hardy modesty, or
perhaps better a certain
modest hardihood. For
while themselves are not
exactly wantons, and will
neither solicit a man nor
yet actually offer their
favors, yet do they know
well how to rouse the
appetites and passions, and
prettily allure to the
skirmish in such wise that
he which doth not take
occasion by the forelock and
join encounter, and that
without the least awe of
rank and greatness, without
a scruple of conscience or a
fear or any sort of
hesitation, he verily is a
fool and a spiritless
poltroon, and one which
doth merit to be forever
abandoned of kind fortune.
• I have heard of two
honorable gentlemen and
comrades, for the which two
very honorable ladies, and
of by no means humble
quality, made tryst one day
at Paris to go walking in a
garden. Being come thither,
each lady did separate
apart one from the other,
each alone with her own
cavalier, each in a several
alley of the garden, that
was so close covered in with
a fair trellis of boughs as
that daylight could really
scarce penetrate there at all,
and the coolness of the
place was very grateful.
The Anti-Seducer • 139
For two months Meilcour trembled in de Lursay's presence. He was
afraid of her, and did not know what to do. One evening they were dis-
cussing a recent play. How well one character had declared his love to a
woman, Madame remarked. Noting Meilcour's obvious discomfort, she
went on, "If I am not mistaken, a declaration can only seem such an em-
barrassing matter because you yourself have one to make." Madame de
Lursay knew full well that she was the source of the young man's awkward-
ness, but she was a tease; you must tell me, she said, with whom you are in
love. Finally Meilcour confessed: it was indeed Madame whom he desired.
His mother's friend advised him to not think of her that way, but she also
sighed, and gave him a long and languid look. Her words said one thing,
her eyes another—perhaps she was not as untouchable as he had thought.
As the evening ended, though, Madame de Lursay said she doubted his
feelings would last, and she left young Meilcour troubled that she had said
nothing about reciprocating his love.
Over the next few days, Meilcour repeatedly asked de Lursay to declare
her love for him, and she repeatedly refused. Eventually the young man de-
cided his cause was hopeless, and gave up; but a few nights later, at a soiree
at her house, her dress seemed more enticing than usual, and her looks at
him stirred his blood. He returned them, and followed her around, while
she took care to keep a bit of distance, lest others sense what was happen-
ing. Yet she also managed to arrange that he could stay without arousing
suspicion when the other visitors left.
When they were finally alone, she made him sit beside her on the sofa.
He could barely speak; the silence was uncomfortable. To get him talking
she raised the same old subject: his youth would make his love for her a
passing fancy. Instead of denying it he looked dejected, and continued to
keep a polite distance, so that she finally exclaimed, with obvious irony, "If
it were known that you were here with my consent, that I had voluntarily
arranged it with you . . . what might not people say? And yet how wrong
they would be, for no one could be more respectful than you are." Goaded
into action, Meilcour grabbed her hand and looked her in the eye. She
blushed and told him he should go, but the way she arranged herself on the
sofa and looked back at him suggested he should do the opposite. Yet Meil-
cour still hesitated: she had told him to go, and if he disobeyed she might
cause a scene, and might never forgive him; he would have made a fool of
himself, and everyone, including his mother, would hear of it. He soon got
up, apologizing for his momentary boldness. Her astonished and somewhat
cold look meant he had indeed gone too far, he imagined, and he said
goodbye and left.
Meilcour and Madame de Lursay appear in the novel The Wayward Head
and Heart, written in 1738 by Crébillon fils, who based his characters on
libertines he knew in the France of the time. For Crébillon fils, seduction is
all about signs—about being able to send them and read them. This is notNow one of the twain was
a bold man, and well
knowing how the party
had been made for
something else than merely
to walk and take the air,
and judging by his lady's
face, which he saw to be all
a-fire, that she had
longings to taste other fare
than the muscatels that
hung on the trellis, as also
by her hot, wanton, and
wild speech, he did
promptly seize on so fair
an opportunity. So catching
hold of her without the
least ceremony, he did lay
her on a little couch that
was there made of turf and
clods of earth, and did very
pleasantly work his will of
her, without her ever
uttering a word but only:
"Heavens! Sir, what are
you at? Surely you be the
maddest and strangest
fellow ever was! If anyone
comes, whatever will they
say? Great heavens! get
out!" But the gentleman,
without disturbing himself,
did so well continue what
he had begun that he did
finish, and she to boot,
with such content as that
after taking three or four
turns up and down the
alley, they did presently
start afresh. Anon, coming
forth into another, open,
alley, they did see in
another part of the garden
the other pair, who were
walking about together just
as they had left them at
first. Whereupon the lady,
well content, did say to the
gentleman in the like
condition, "I verily believe
so and so hath played the
silly prude, and hath given
his lady no other
entertainment but only
words, fine speeches, and
promenading." • Afterward
when all four were come
together, the two ladies did
fall to asking one another
