The Natural • 63
Frenchwoman of fashion, a caricature not of blackness but of whiteness.
Everything was a role to play—the comedienne, the primitive dancer, the
ultrastylish Parisian. And everything Josephine did, she did with such a light
spirit, such a lack of pretension, that she continued to seduce the jaded
French for years. Her funeral, in 1975, was nationally televised, a huge cul-
tural event. She was buried with the kind of pomp normally reserved only
for heads of state.
From very early on, Josephine Baker could not stand the feeling of having
no control over the world. Yet what could she do in the face of her un-
promising circumstances? Some young girls put all their hopes on a hus-
band, but Josephine's father had left her mother soon after she was born,
and she saw marriage as something that would only make her more misera-
ble. Her solution was something children often do: confronted with a
hopeless environment, she closed herself off in a world of her own making,
oblivious to the ugliness around her. This world was filled with dancing,
clowning, dreams of great things. Let other people wail and moan; Jose-
phine would smile, remain confident and self-reliant. Almost everyone who
met her, from her earliest years to her last, commented on how seductive
this quality was. Her refusal to compromise, or to be what she was expected
to be, made everything she did seem authentic and natural.
A child loves to play, and to create a little self-contained world. When
children are absorbed in make believe, they are hopelessly charming. They
infuse their imaginings with such seriousness and feeling. Adult Naturals do
something similar, particularly if they are artists: they create their own fan-
tasy world, and live in it as if it were the real one. Fantasy is so much more
pleasant than reality, and since most people do not have the power or
courage to create such a world, they enjoy being around those who do. Re-
member: the role you were given in life is not the role you have to accept.
You can always live out a role of your own creation, a role that fits your
fantasy. Learn to play with your image, never taking it too seriously. The
key is to infuse your play with the conviction and feeling of a child, making
it seem natural. The more absorbed you seem in your own joy-filled world,
the more seductive you become. Do not go halfway: make the fantasy you
inhabit as radical and exotic as possible, and you will attract attention like a
magnet.
4. It was the Festival of the Cherry Blossom at the Heian court, in late-
tenth-century Japan. In the emperor's palace, many of the courtiers were
drunk, and others were fast asleep, but the young princess Oborozukiyo,
the emperor's sister-in-law, was awake and reciting a poem: "What can
compare with a misty moon of spring?" Her voice was smooth and deli-
cate. She moved to the door of her apartment to look at the moon. Then,
suddenly, she smelled something sweet, and a hand clutched the sleeve of
her robe. "Who are you?" she said, frightened. "There is nothing to be
64 • The Art of Seduction
afraid of," came a man's voice, and continued with a poem of his own:
"Late in the night we enjoy a misty moon. There is nothing misty about
the bond between us." Without another word, the man pulled the princess
to him and picked her up, carrying her into a gallery outside her room,
sliding the door closed behind him. She was terrified, and tried to call for
help. In the darkness she heard him say, a little louder now, "It will do you
no good. I am always allowed my way. Just be quiet, if you will, please."
Now the princess recognized the voice, and the scent: it was Genji, the
young son of the late emperor's concubine, whose robes bore a distinctive
perfume. This calmed her somewhat, since the man was someone she
knew, but on the other hand she also knew of his reputation: Genji was the
court's most incorrigible seducer, a man who stopped at nothing. He was
drunk, it was near dawn, and the watchmen would soon be on their
rounds; she did not want to be discovered with him. But then she began to
make out the outlines of his face—so pretty, his look so sincere, without a
trace of malice. Then came more poems, recited in that charming voice,
the words so insinuating. The images he conjured filled her mind, and dis-
tracted her from his hands. She could not resist him.
As the light began to rise, Genji got to his feet. He said a few tender
words, they exchanged fans, and then he quickly left. The serving women
were coming through the emperor's rooms by now, and when they saw
Genji scurrying away, the perfume of his robes lingering after him, they
smiled, knowing he was up to his usual tricks; but they never imagined he
would dare approach the sister of the emperor's wife.
In the days that followed, Oborozukiyo could only think of Genji. She
knew he had other mistresses, but when she tried to put him out of her
mind, a letter from him would arrive, and she would be back to square one.
In truth, she had started the correspondence, haunted by his midnight visit.
She had to see him again. Despite the risk of discovery, and the fact that
her sister Kokiden, the emperor's wife, hated Genji, she arranged for fur-
ther trysts in her apartment. But one night an envious courtier found them
together. Word reached Kokiden, who naturally was furious. She de-
manded that Genji be banished from court and the emperor had no choice
but to agree.
Genji went far away, and things settled down. Then the emperor died
and his son took over. A kind of emptiness had come to the court: the
dozens of women whom Genji had seduced could not endure his absence,
and flooded him with letters. Even women who had never known him in-
timately would weep over any relic he had left behind—a robe, for in-
stance, in which his scent still lingered. And the young emperor missed his
jocular presence. And the princesses missed the music he had played on the
koto. And Oborozukiyo pined for his midnight visits. Finally even Kokiden
broke down, realizing that she could not resist him. So Genji was sum-
moned back to the court. And not only was he forgiven, he was given a
hero's welcome; the young emperor himself greeted the scoundrel with
tears in his eyes.
