The Siren • 13
female creatures, sing and beckon sailors to their destruction. They sing of
the glories of the past, of a world like childhood, without responsibilities, a
world of pure pleasure. Their voices are like water, liquid and inviting.
Sailors would leap into the water to join them, and drown; or, distracted
and entranced, they would steer their ship into the rocks. To protect his
sailors from the Sirens, Odysseus has their ears filled with wax; he himself is
tied to the mast, so he can both hear the Sirens and live to tell of it—a
strange desire, since the thrill of the Sirens is giving in to the temptation to
follow them.
Just as the ancient sailors had to row and steer, ignoring all distractions,
a man today must work and follow a straight path in life. The call of some-
thing dangerous, emotional, unknown is all the more powerful because it is
so forbidden. Think of the victims of the great Sirens of history: Paris
causes a war for the sake of Helen of Troy, Caesar risks an empire and
Antony loses his power and his life for Cleopatra, Napoleon becomes a
laughingstock over Josephine, DiMaggio never gets over Marilyn, and
Arthur Miller can't write for years. A man is often ruined by a Siren, yet
cannot tear himself away. (Many powerful men have a masochistic streak.)
An element of danger is easy to hint at, and will enhance your other Siren
characteristics—the touch of madness in Marilyn, for example, that pulled
men in. Sirens are often fantastically irrational, which is immensely attrac-
tive to men who are oppressed by their own reasonableness. An element of
fear is also critical: keeping a man at a proper distance creates respect, so
that he doesn't get close enough to see through you or notice your weaker
qualities. Create such fear by suddenly changing your moods, keeping the
man off balance, occasionally intimidating him with capricious behavior.
The most important element for an aspiring Siren is always the physical,
the Siren's main instrument of power. Physical qualities—a scent, a height-
ened femininity evoked through makeup or through elaborate or seductive
clothing—act all the more powerfully on men because they have no mean-
ing. In their immediacy they bypass rational processes, having the same ef-
fect that a decoy has on an animal, or the movement of a cape on a bull.
The proper Siren appearance is often confused with physical beauty, par-
ticularly the face. But a beautiful face does not a Siren make: instead it cre-
ates too much distance and coldness. (Neither Cleopatra nor Marilyn
Monroe, the two greatest Sirens in history, were known for their beautiful
faces.) Although a smile and an inviting look are infinitely seductive, they
must never dominate your appearance. They are too obvious and direct.
The Siren must stimulate a generalized desire, and the best way to do this is
by creating an overall impression that is both distracting and alluring. It is
not one particular trait, but a combination of qualities:
The voice. Clearly a critical quality, as the legend indicates, the Siren's
voice has an immediate animal presence with incredible suggestive power.
Perhaps that power is regressive, recalling the ability of the mother's voiceFalling in love with statues
and paintings, even
making love to them is an
ancient fantasy, one of
which the Renaissance was
keenly aware. Giorgio
Vasari, writing in the
introductory section of the
Lives about art in
antiquity, tells how men
violated the laws, going
into the temples at night
and making love with
statues of Venus. In the
morning, priests would
enter the sanctuaries to find
stains on the marble
figures.
—LYNNE LAWNER,
LIVES OF THE COURTESANS
14 • The Art of Seduction
to calm or excite her child even before the child understood what she was
saying. The Siren must have an insinuating voice that hints at the erotic,
more often subliminally than overtly. Almost everyone who met Cleopatra
commented on her delightful, sweet-sounding voice, which had a mesmer-
izing quality. The Empress Josephine, one of the great seductresses of the
late eighteenth century, had a languorous voice that men found exotic, and
suggestive of her Creole origins. Marilyn Monroe was born with her
breathy, childlike voice, but she learned to lower to make it truly seductive.
Lauren Bacall's voice is naturally low; its seductive power comes from its
slow, suggestive delivery. The Siren never speaks quickly, aggressively, or at
a high pitch. Her voice is calm and unhurried, as if she had never quite
woken up—or left her bed.
Body and adornment. If the voice must lull, the body and its adornment
must dazzle. It is with her clothes that the Siren aims to create the god-
dess effect that Baudelaire described in his essay "In Praise of Makeup":
"Woman is well within her rights, and indeed she is accomplishing a kind
of duty in striving to appear magical and supernatural. She must astonish
and bewitch; an idol, she must adorn herself with gold in order to be
adored. She must borrow from all of the arts in order to raise herself above
nature, the better to subjugate hearts and stir souls."
A Siren who was a genius of clothes and adornment was Pauline Bona-
parte, sister of Napoleon. Pauline consciously strove for a goddess effect,
fashioning hair, makeup, and clothes to evoke the look and air of Venus,
the goddess of love. No one in history could boast a more extensive and
elaborate wardrobe. Pauline's entrance at a ball in 1798 created an astound-
ing effect. She asked the hostess, Madame Permon, if she could dress at her
house, so no one would see her clothes as she came in. When she came
down the stairs, everyone stopped dead in stunned silence. She wore the
headdress of a bacchante—clusters of gold grapes interlaced in her hair,
which was done up in the Greek style. Her Greek tunic, with its gold-
embroidered hem, showed off her goddesslike figure. Below her breasts was
a girdle of burnished gold, held by a magnificent jewel. "No words can
convey the loveliness of her appearance," wrote the Duchess d'Abrantes.
"The very room grew brighter as she entered. The whole ensemble was so
harmonious that her appearance was greeted with a buzz of admiration
which continued with utter disregard of all the other women."
The key: everything must dazzle, but must also be harmonious, so that
no single ornament draws attention. Your presence must be charged, larger
than life, a fantasy come true. Ornament is used to cast a spell and distract.
The Siren can also use clothing to hint at the sexual, at times overtly but
more often by suggesting it rather than screaming it—that would make you
seem manipulative. Related to this is the notion of selective disclosure, the
revealing of only a part of the body—but a part that will excite and stir the
imagination. In the late sixteenth century, Marguerite de Valois, the infa-
