444 • Appendix B: Soft Seduction: How to Sell Anything to the Masses
In the centuries since, publicists, advertisers, political strategists, and
others have taken this method to new heights, but the rudiments of the soft
sell remain the same. First bring pleasure by creating a positive atmosphere
around your name or message. Induce a warm, relaxed feeling. Never seem
to be selling something—that will look manipulative and suspicious. In-
stead, let entertainment value and good feelings take center stage, sneaking
the sale through the side door. And in that sale, you do not seem to be sell-
ing yourself or a particular idea or candidate; you are selling a life-style, a
good mood, a sense of adventure, a feeling of hipness, or a neatly packaged
rebellion.
Here are some of the key components of the soft sell.
Appear as news, never as publicity. First impressions are critical. If
your audience first sees you in the context of an advertisement or publicity
item, you instantly join the mass of other advertisements screaming for
attention—and everyone knows that advertisements are artful manipula-
tions, a kind of deception. So, for your first appearance in the public eye,
manufacture an event, some kind of attention-getting situation that the
media will "inadvertently" pick up as if it were news. People pay more at-
tention to what is broadcast as news—it seems more real. You suddenly
stand out from everything else, if only for a moment—but that moment
has more credibility than hours of advertising time. The key is to orches-
trate the details thoroughly, creating a story with dramatic impact and
movement, tension and resolution. The media will cover it for days. Con-
ceal your real purpose—to sell yourself—at any cost.
Stir basic emotions. Never promote your message through a rational, di-
rect argument. That will take effort on your audience's part and will not
gain its attention. Aim for the heart, not the head. Design your words and
images to stir basic emotions—lust, patriotism, family values. It is easier to
gain and hold people's attention once you have made them think of their
family, their children, their future. They feel stirred, uplifted. Now you
have their attention and the space to insinuate your true message. Days later
the audience will remember your name, and remembering your name is
half the game. Similarly, find ways to surround yourself with emotional
magnets—war heroes, children, saints, small animals, whatever it takes.
Make your appearance bring these emotionally positive associations to
mind, giving you extra presence. Never let these associations be defined or
created for you, and never leave them to chance.
Make the medium the message. Pay more attention to the form of your
message than to the content. Images are more seductive than words, and vi-
suals—soothing colors, appropriate backdrop, the suggestion of speed
Appendix B: Soft Seduction: How to Sell Anything to the Masses • 445
or movement—should actually be your real message. The audience may
focus superficially on the content or moral you are preaching, but they are
really absorbing the visuals, which get under their skin and stay there longer
than any words or preachy pronouncements. Your visuals should have a
hypnotic effect. They should make people feel happy or sad, depending on
what you want to accomplish. And the more they are distracted by visual
cues, the harder it will be for them to think straight or see through your
manipulations.
Speak the target's language—be chummy. At all costs, avoid appearing
superior to your audience. Any hint of smugness, the use of complicated
words or ideas, quoting too many statistics—all that is fatal. Instead, make
yourself seem equal to your targets and on intimate terms with them. You
understand them, you share their spirit, their language. If people are cynical
about the manipulations of advertisers and politicians, exploit their cyni-
cism for your own purposes. Portray yourself as one of the folk, warts and
all. Show that you share your audience's skepticism by revealing the tricks
of the trade. Make your publicity as down-home and minimal as possible,
so that your competitors look sophisticated and snobby in comparison.
Your selective honesty and strategic weakness will get people to trust you.
You are the audience's friend, an intimate. Enter their spirit and they will
relax and listen to you.
Start a chain reaction—everyone is doing it. People who seem to be de-
sired by others are immediately more seductive to their targets. Apply this
to the soft seduction. You need to act as if you have already excited crowds
of people; your behavior will become a self-fulfilling prophecy. Seem to be
in the vanguard of a trend or life-style and the public will lap you up for
fear of being left behind. Spread your image, with a logo, slogans, posters,
so that it appears everywhere. Announce your message as a trend and it will
become one. The goal is to create a kind of viral effect in which more and
more people become infected with the desire to have whatever you are of-
fering. This is the easiest and most seductive way to sell.
Tell people who they are. It is always unwise to engage an individual or
the public in any kind of argument. They will resist you. Instead of trying
to change people's ideas, try to change their identity, their perception of
reality, and you will have far more control of them in the long run. Tell
them who they are, create an image, an identity that they will want to as-
sume. Make them dissatisfied with their current status. Making them un-
happy with themselves gives you room to suggest a new life-style, a new
identity. Only by listening to you can they find out who they are. At the
same time, you want to change their perception of the world outside them
