Mix Pleasure with Pain • 373
want or you will never see me again. Suddenly Conchita started to cry. He
had never seen her cry, and it moved him. She too was tired of all this, she
said, her voice trembling; if it was not too late, she was ready to accept the
proposal she had once turned down. Set her up in a house, and he would
see what a devoted mistress she would be.
Don Mateo wasted no time. He bought her a villa, gave her plenty of
money to decorate it. After eight days the house was ready. She would re-
ceive him there at midnight. What joys awaited him.
Don Mateo showed up at the appointed hour. The barred door to the
courtyard was closed. He rang the bell. She came to the other side of the
door. "Kiss my hands," she said through the bars. "Now kiss the hem of my
skirt, and the tip of my foot in its slipper." He did as she requested. "That is
good," she said. "Now you may go." His shocked expression just made her
laugh. She ridiculed him, then made a confession: she was repulsed by him.
Now that she had a villa in her name, she was free of him at last. She called
out, and a young man appeared from the shadows of the courtyard. As Don
Mateo watched, too stunned to move, they began to make love on the
floor, right before his eyes.
The next morning Conchita appeared at Don Mateo's house, suppos-
edly to see if he had committed suicide. To her surprise, he hadn't—in fact
he slapped her so hard she fell to the ground. "Conchita," he said, "you
have made me suffer beyond all human strength. You have invented moral
tortures to try them on the only man who loved you passionately. I now
declare that I am going to possess you by force." Conchita screamed she
would never be his, but he hit her again and again. Finally, moved by her
tears, he stopped. Now she looked up at him lovingly. Forget the past, she
said, forget all that I have done. Now that he hit her, now that she could see
his pain, she felt certain he truly loved her. She was still a mozita—the affair
with the young man the night before had been only for show, ending as
soon as he had left—and she still belonged to him. "You are not going to
take me by force. I await you in my arms." Finally she was sincere. To his
supreme delight, he discovered that she was indeed still a virgin.
Interpretation. Don Mateo and Conchita Perez are characters in the 1896
novella Woman and Puppet, by Pierre Louÿs. Based on a true story—the
"Miss Charpillon" episode in Casanova's Memoirs—the novella has served as
the basis for two films: Josef von Sternberg's Devil Is a Woman, with Mar-
lene Dietrich, and Luis Buñuel's That Obscure Object of Desire. In Louÿs's
story, Conchita takes a proud and aggressive older man and in the space of a
few months turns him into an abject slave. Her method is simple: she stimu-
lates as many emotions as possible, including heavy doses of pain. She ex-
cites his lust, then makes him feel base for taking advantage of her. She gets
him to play the protector, then makes him feel guilty for trying to buy her.
Her sudden disappearance anguishes him—he has lost her—so that when
she reappears (never by accident) he feels intense joy; which, however, sheOderint, dum metuant
[Let them hate me so long
as they fear me], as if only
fear and hate belong
together, whereas fear and
love have nothing to do
with each other, as if it
were not fear that makes
love interesting. With what
kind of love do we embrace
nature? Is there not a
secretive anxiety and horror
in it, because its beautiful
harmony works its way out
of lawlessness and wild
confusion, its security out
of perfidy? But precisely
this anxiety captivates the
most. So also with love, if
it is to he interesting.
Behind it ought to brood
the deep, anxious night
from which springs the
flower of love.
—SØREN KIERKEGAARD,
THE SEDUCER'S DIARY,
TRANSLATED BY HOWARD V.
HONG AND EDNA H. HONG
The lovely marble creature
coughed and rearranged the
sable around her shoulders.
• "Thank you for the
lesson in classics," I replied,
"but I cannot deny that in
your peaceful and sunny
world just as in our misty
climate man and woman
are natural enemies. Love
may unite them briefly to
form one mind, one heart,
one will, but all too soon
they are torn asunder. And
this you know better than
I: either one of them must
bend the other to his will,
or else he must let himself
be trampled underfoot. " •
"Under the woman's foot,
of course," said Lady
Venus impertinently. "And
that you know better than
I." • "Of course, that is
why I have no illusions." •
"In other words you are
now my slave without
illusions, and I shall
374 • The Art of Seduction
quickly turns back into tears. Jealousy and humiliation then precede the fi-
nal moment when she gives him her virginity. (Even after this, according to
the story, she finds ways to continue to torment him.) Each low she
inspires—guilt, despair, jealousy, emptiness—creates the space for a more
intense high. He becomes an addict, hooked on the alternation of charge
and withdrawal.
Your seduction should never follow a simple course upward toward
pleasure and harmony. The climax will come too soon, and the pleasure
will be weak. What makes us intensely appreciate something is previous
suffering. A brush with death makes us fall in love with life; a long journey
makes a return home that much more pleasurable. Your task is to create
moments of sadness, despair, and anguish, to create the tension that allows
for a great release. Do not worry about making people angry; anger is a
sure sign that you have your hooks in them. Nor should you be afraid that
if you make yourself difficult people will flee—we only abandon those
who bore us. The ride on which you take your victims can be tortuous but
never dull. At all costs, keep your targets emotional and on edge. Create
enough highs and lows and you will wear away the last vestiges of their
willpower.
Harshness and Kindness
In 1972, Henry Kissinger, then President Richard Nixon's assistant for
national security affairs, received a request for an interview from the fa-
mous Italian journalist Oriana Fallaci. Kissinger rarely gave interviews; he
had no control over the final product, and he was a man who needed to be
in control. But he had read Fallaci's interview with a North Vietnamese
general, and it had been instructive. She was extremely well informed on
the Vietnam War; perhaps he could gather some information of his own,
pick her brain. He decided to ask for a preinterview, a preliminary meeting.
He would grill her on different subjects; if she passed the test, he would
grant her an interview proper. They met, and he was impressed; she was
extremely intelligent—and tough. It would be an enjoyable challenge to
outwit her and prove that he was tougher. He agreed to a short interview a
few days later.
To Kissinger's annoyance, Fallaci began the interview by asking him
whether he was disappointed by the slow pace of the peace negotiations
with North Vietnam. He would not discuss the negotiations—he had made
that clear in the preinterview. Yet she continued the same line of question-
ing. He grew a little angry "That's enough," he said. "I don't want to
talk any more about Vietnam." Although she didn't immediately aban-
don the subject, her questions became gentler: what were his personal feel-
ings toward the leaders of South and North Vietnam? Still, he ducked:
"I'm not the kind of person to be swayed by emotion. Emotions serve
no purpose." She moved to grander philosophical issues—war, peace. Shetrample you mercilessly. " •
"Madam!" • "You do not
know me yet. I admit that
I am cruel—since the word
gives you so much
delight—but am I not
entitled to be so? It is man
who desires, woman who is
desired; this is woman's
only advantage, but it is a
decisive one. By making
man so vulnerable to
passion, nature has placed
him at woman's mercy, and
she who has not the sense
to treat him like a humble
subject, a slave, a
plaything, and finally to
betray him with a laugh—
well, she is a woman of
little wisdom." • "My
dear, your principles . . ."
I protested. • "Are
founded on the experience
of a thousand years," she
replied mischievously,
running her white fingers
through the dark fur. "The
more submissive woman is,
the more readily man
recovers his self-possession
and becomes domineering;
but the more cruel and
faithless she is, the more
she ill-treats him, the
more wantonly she toys
with him and the harsher
she is, the more she
quickens his desire and
secures his love and
admiration. It has always
been so, from the time of
Helen and Delilah all the
way to Catherine the
Great and Lola Montez. "
—LEOPOLD VON SACHER-
MASOCH, VENUS IN FURS,
TRANSLATED BY JEAN MCNEIL
In essence, the domain
of eroticism is the domain of
violence, of violation. . . .
The whole business of
eroticism is to strike to the
inmost core of the living
being, so that the heart
stands still. . . . The
