xii • Contents
The Dandy page 41
Most of us feel trapped within the limited roles that the world expects us to play. We are in-
stantly attracted to those who are more fluid than we are—those who create their own persona.
Dandies excite us because they cannot be categorized, and hint at a freedom we want for our-
selves. They play with masculinity and femininity; they fashion their own physical image,
which is always startling. Use the power of the Dandy to create an ambiguous, alluring pres-
ence that stirs repressed desires.
The Natural page 53
Childhood is the golden paradise we are always consciously or unconsciously trying to re-create.
The Natural embodies the longed-for qualities of childhood—spontaneity, sincerity, unpre-
tentiousness. In the presence of Naturals, we feel at ease, caught up in their playful spirit,
transported back to that golden age. Adopt the pose of the Natural to neutralize people's
defensivencss and infect them with helpless delight.
The Coquette page 67
The ability to delay satisfaction is the ultimate art of seduction—while waiting, the victim is
held in thrall. Coquettes are the grand masters of the game, orchestrating a back-and-forth
movement between hope and frustration. They bait with the promise of reward—the hope of
physical pleasure, happiness, fame by association, power—all of which, however, proves elu-
sive; yet this only makes their targets pursue them the more. Imitate the alternating heat and
coolness of the Coquette and you will keep the seduced at your heels.
The Charmer page 79
Charm is seduction without sex. Charmers are consummate manipulators, masking their clev-
erness by creating a mood of pleasure and comfort. Their method is simple: They deflect atten-
tion from themselves and focus it on their target. They understand your spirit, feel your pain,
adapt to your moods. In the presence of a Charmer you feel better about yourself. Learn to cast
the Charmer's spell by aiming at people's primary weaknesses: vanity and self-esteem.
The Charismatic page 95
Charisma is a presence that excites us. It comes from an inner quality—self-confidence, sexual
energy, sense of purpose, contentment—that most people lack and want. This quality radiates
outward, permeating the gestures of Charismatics, making them seem extraordinary and supe-
rior. They learn to heighten their charisma with a piercing gaze, fiery oratory, an air of mys-
tery. Create the charismatic illusion by radiating intensity while remaining detached.
The Star page 119
Daily life is harsh, and most of us constantly seek escape from it in fantasies and dreams. Stars
feed on this weakness; standing out from others through a distinctive and appealing style, they
make us want to watch them. At the same time, they are vague and ethereal, keeping their
distance, and letting us imagine more than is there. Their dreamlike quality works on our un-
conscious. Learn to become an object of fascination by projecting the glittering but elusive pres-
ence of the Star.
Contents • xiii
The Anti-Seducer page 131
Seducers draw you in by the focused, individualized attention they pay to you. Anti-seducers
are the opposite: insecure, self-absorbed, and unable to grasp the psychology of another person,
they literally repel Anti-Seducers have no self-awareness, and never realize when they are
pestering, imposing, talking too much. Root out anti-seductive qualities in yourself and recog-
nize them in others—there is no pleasure or profit in dealing with the Anti-Seducer.
The Seducer's Victims—The Eighteen Types page 147
Part Two
The Seductive Process page 161
Phase One: Separation—Stirring Interest and Desire
1 Choose the Right Victim page 167
Everything depends on the target of your seduction. Study your prey thoroughly, and choose
only those who will prove susceptible to your charms. The right victims are those for whom you
can fill a void, who see in you something exotic. They are often isolated or unhappy, or can
easily be made so—for the completely contented person is almost impossible to seduce. The
perfect victim has some quality that inspires strong emotions in you, making your seductive
maneuvers seem more natural and dynamic. The perfect victim allows for the perfect chase.
2 Create a False Sense of Security—Approach Indirectly page 177
If you are too direct early on, you risk stirring up a resistance that will never be lowered. At
first there must be nothing of the seducer in your manner. The seduction should begin at an
angle, indirectly, so that the target only gradually becomes aware of you. Haunt the periphery
of your target's life—approach through a third party, or seem to cultivate a relatively neutral re-
lationship, moving gradually from friend to lover. Lull the target into feeling secure, then strike.
3 Send Mixed Signals page 185
Once people are aware of your presence, and perhaps vaguely intrigued, you need to stir their
interest before it settles on someone else. Most of us are much too obvious—instead, be hard to
figure out. Send mixed signals: both tough and tender, both spiritual and earthly, both inno-
cent and cunning. A mix of qualities suggests depth, which fascinates even as it confuses. An
elusive, enigmatic aura will make people want to know more, drawing them into your circle.
Create such a power by hinting at something contradictory within you.
4 Appear to Be an Object of Desire—Create Triangles page 195
Few are drawn to the person whom others avoid or neglect; people gather around those who
have already attracted interest. To draw your victims closer and make them hungry to possess
you, you must create an aura of desirability—of being wanted and courted by many. It will
become a point of vanity for them to be the preferred object of your attention, to win you away
from a crowd of admirers. Build a reputation that precedes you: If many have succumbed to
your charms, there must be a reason.
