Beware the Aftereffects • 421
things was through a man—and who better than the king? But to get in-
volved with Charles was a dangerous game. A man like him, easily bored
and in need of variety, would use her for a fling, then find someone else.
Nell's strategy for the problem was simple: she let the king have his
other girls, and never complained. Every time he saw her, though, she
made sure he was entertained and diverted. She filled his senses with plea-
sure, acting as if his position had nothing to do with her love for him. Vari-
ety in women could wear on the nerves, tiring a busy king. They all made
so many demands. If one woman could provide the same variety (and Nell,
as an actress, knew how to play different roles), she had a big advantage.
Nell never asked for money, so Charles plied her with wealth. She never
asked to be the favorite—how could she? She was a commoner—but he ele-
vated her to the position.
Many of your targets will be like kings and queens, particularly those
who are easily bored. Once the seduction is over they will not only have
trouble idealizing you, they may also turn to another man or woman whose
unfamiliarity seems exciting and poetic. Needing other people to divert
them, they often satisfy this need through variety. Do not play into the
hands of these bored royals by complaining, becoming self-pitying, or de-
manding privileges. That would only further their natural disenchantment
once the seduction is over. Instead, make them see that you are not the per-
son they thought you were. Make it a delightful game to play new roles, to
surprise them, to be an endless source of entertainment. It is almost impos-
sible to resist a person who provides pleasure with no strings attached.
When they are with you, keep the spirit light and playful. Play up the parts
of your character they find delightful, but never let them feel they know
you too well. In the end you will control the dynamic, and a haughty king
or queen will become your abject slave.
3. When the great jazz composer Duke Ellington came to town, he and his
band were always a big attraction, but especially so for the ladies of the area.
They came to hear his music, of course, but once there they were mesmer-
ized by "the Duke" himself. Onstage, Ellington was relaxed and elegant,
and seemed to be having such a good time. His face was very handsome,
and his bedroom eyes were infamous. (He slept very little, and his eyes had
permanent pouches under them.) After the performance, some woman
would inevitably invite him to her table, another would sneak into his
dressing room, yet another would approach him on his way out. Duke
made a point of being accessible, and when he kissed a woman's hand, his
eyes and hers would meet for a moment. Sometimes she would signal an
interest in him, and his glance in return would say he was more than ready.
Sometimes his eyes were the first to speak; few women could resist that
look, even the most happily married.
With the night's music still ringing in her ears, the woman would show
up at Ellington's hotel room. He would be dressed in a stylish suit—hemy door. One day he came
to see me, knocked at my
door, but I did not open it.
You see, I had the painter,
Callides, in my room;
Callides had given me ten
drachmas. Demophantos
swore and beat his fists on
the door and left cursing
me. Several days passed
without my sending for
him; Callides was still in
my house. Thereupon
Demophantos, who was
already quite excited, went
wild. He broke open my
door, wept, pulled me
about, threatened to kill
me, tore my tunic, and did
everything, in fact, that a
jealous man would do, and
finally presented me with
six thousand drachmas. In
consideration of this sum, I
was his for a period of
eight months. His wife
used to say that I had
bewitched him with some
powder. That bewitching
powder, to be sure, was
jealousy. That is why,
Chrysis, I advise you to act
likewise with Corgi as.
—LUCIAN, DIALOGUES OF THE
COURTESANS, TRANSLATED BY
A.L.H.
"A wife is someone on
whom one gazes all one's
life; yet it is just as well if
she be not beautiful''—so
spake Jinta of the Gion.
I'll is may be the flippant
saying of a go-between, but
it is not to be dismissed too
lightly. . . . Besides, it is
with beautiful women as
with beautiful views: if one
is forever looking at them,
one soon tires of their
charm. This I can judge
from my own experience.
One year I went to
Matsushima, and, though
at first I was moved by the
beauty of the place and
clapped my hands with
422 • The Art of Seduction
loved good clothes—and the room would be full of flowers; there would
be a piano in the corner. He would play some music. His playing, and his
elegant, nonchalant manner, would come across to the woman as pure the-
ater, a pleasant continuation of the performance she had just witnessed.
And when it was over, and Ellington had to leave town, he would give her
a thoughtful gift. He would make it seem that the only thing taking him
away from her was his touring. A few weeks later, the woman might hear a
new Ellington song on the radio, with lyrics suggesting that she had in-
spired it. If ever he passed through the area again, she would find a way to
be there, and Ellington would often renew the affair, if only for a night.
Sometime in the 1940s, two young women from Alabama came to
Chicago to attend a debutante ball. Ellington and his band were the enter-
tainment. He was the women's favorite musician, and after the show, they
asked him for an autograph. He was so charming and engaging that one of
the girls found herself asking what hotel he was staying at. He told them,
with a big grin. The girls switched hotels, and later that day they called up
Ellington and invited him to their room for a drink. He accepted. They
wore beautiful negligees that they had just bought. When Ellington ar-
rived, he acted completely naturally, as if the warm greeting they gave him
were completely usual. The three of them ended up in the bedroom, when
one of the young women had an idea: her mother adored Ellington. She
had to call her now and put Ellington on the phone. Not at all put out by
the suggestion, Ellington played along. For several minutes he talked to the
mother on the telephone, lavishing her with compliments on the charming
daughter she had raised, and telling her not to worry—he was taking good
care of the girl. The daughter got back on the phone and said, "We're fine
because we're with Mr. Ellington and he's such a perfect gentleman." As
soon as she hung up, the three of them resumed the naughtiness they had
started. To the two girls, it later seemed an innocent but unforgettable night
of pleasure.
Sometimes several of these far-flung mistresses would show up at the
same concert. Ellington would go up and kiss each of them four times (a
habit of his designed for just this dilemma). And each of the ladies would
assume she was the one with whom the kisses really mattered.
Interpretation. Duke Ellington had two passions: music and women. The
two were interrelated. His endless affairs were a constant inspiration for his
music; he also treated them as if they were theater, a work of art in them-
selves. When it came time to separate, he always managed it with a theatri-
cal touch. A clever remark and a gift would make it seem that for him the
affair was hardly over. Song lyrics referring to their night together would
keep up the aesthetic atmosphere long after he had left town. No wonder
women kept coming back for more. This was not a sexual affair, a tawdry
one-nighter, but a heightened moment in the woman's life. And his care-
free attitude made it impossible to feel guilty; thoughts of one's mother oradmiration, saying to
myself, "Oh, if only I
could bring some poet here
to show him this great
wonder!"—yet, after I had
been gazing at the scene
from morning until night,
the myriad islands began to
smell unpleasantly of
seaweed, the waves that
beat on Matsuyama Point
became obstreperous; before
I knew it I had let all the
cherry blossoms at
Shiogama scatter; in the
morning I overslept and
missed the dawn snow on
Mount Kinka; nor was I
much impressed by the
evening moon at Nagané
or Oshima; and in the end
I picked up a few white
and black pebbles on the
cove and became engrossed
in a game of Six Musashi
with some children.
—IHARA SAIKAKU, THE LIFE OF
AN AMOROUS WOMAN,
TRANSLATED BY IVAN MORRIS
Men despise women who
love too much and
unwisely.
—LUCIAN, DIALOGUES
OF THE COURTESANS,
TRANSLATED BY A.L.H.
I shall endeavor briefly to
outline to you how a love
when gained can be
deepened. They say it can
be increased in particular
by making it an infrequent
and difficult business for
lovers to set eyes on each
other, for the greater the
difficulty of offering and
receiving shared
consolations, the greater
become the desire for, and
feeling of love. Love also
grows if one of the lovers
shows anger to the other,
for a lover is at once sorely
afraid that a partner's
