Object of Worship
Liane de Pougy was the reigning courtesan of 1890s Paris. Slender and
androgynous, she was a novelty, and the wealthiest men in Europe vied
to possess her. By late in the decade, however, she had grown tired of it all.
"What a sterile life," she wrote a friend. "Always the same routine: the Bois,
the races, fittings; and to end an insipid day: dinner!" What wearied the
courtesan most was the constant attention of her male admirers, who
sought to monopolize her physical charms.
One spring day in 1899, Liane was riding in an open carriage through
the Bois de Boulogne. As usual, men tipped their hats at her as she passed
by. But one of these admirers caught her by surprise: a young woman with
long blond hair, who gave her an intense, worshipful stare. Liane smiled at
the woman, who smiled and bowed in return.
A few days later Liane began to receive cards and flowers from a
twenty-three-year-old American named Natalie Barney, who identified
herself as the blond admirer in the Bois de Boulogne, and asked for a ren-
dezvous. Liane invited Natalie to visit, but to amuse herself she decided to
play a little joke: a friend would take her place, lounging on her bed in the
dark boudoir, while Liane would hide behind a screen. Natalie arrived at
the appointed hour. She wore the costume of a Florentine page and carried
a bouquet of flowers. Kneeling before the bed, she began to praise the
courtesan, comparing her to a Fra Angelico painting. All too soon, she
heard someone laugh—and standing up she realized the joke that had been
played on her. She blushed and made for the door. When Liane hurried
out from behind the screen, Natalie chastised her: the courtesan had the
face of an angel, but apparently not the spirit. Contrite, Liane whispered,
"Come back tomorrow morning. I'll be alone."
The young American showed up the next day, wearing the same outfit.
She was witty and spirited; Liane relaxed in her presence, and invited her to
stay for the courtesan's morning ritual—the elaborate makeup, clothes, and
jewelry she put on before heading out into the world. Watching reverently,
Natalie remarked that she worshiped beauty, and that Liane was the most
beautiful woman she had ever seen. Playing the part of the page, she fol-
lowed Liane to the carriage, opened the door for her with a bow, and ac-
companied her on her habitual ride through the Bois de Boulogne. Once
inside the park, Natalie knelt on the floor, out of sight of the passing
gentlemen who tipped their hats to Liane. She recited poems she had writ-Ah! always to be able to
freely love the one whom
one loves! To spend my life
at your feet like our last
days together. To protect
you against imaginary
satyrs so that I can be the
only one to throw you on
this bed of moss. . . .
We'll find each other again
in Lesbos, and when dusk
falls, we'll go deep in the
woods to lose the paths
leading to this century. I
want to imagine us in this
enchanted island of
immortals. I picture it as
being so beautiful. Come,
I'll describe for you those
delicate female couples, and
far from the cities and the
din, we'll forget everything
but the Ethics of Beauty.
—NATALIE BARNEY, LETTER TO
LIANE DE POUGY,QUOTED IN
JEAN CHALON, PORTRAIT OF A
SEDUCTRESS:THE WORLD OF
NATALIE BARNEY, TRANSLATED
BY CAROL BARKO
Terrible Natalie, who used
to ravage the land of love.
Formidable Natalie, feared
by husbands since no one
could resist her
seductiveness. And one
could see how women
361
362 • The Art of Seduction
ten in Liane's honor, and she told the courtesan she considered it a mission
to rescue her from the seamy career into which she had fallen.
That evening Natalie took her to the theater to see Sarah Bernhardt
play Hamlet. During the intermission, she told Liane that she identified
with Hamlet—his hunger for the sublime, his hatred of tyranny—which,
for her, was the tyranny of men over women. Over the next few days Liane
received a steady flow of flowers from Natalie, and telegrams with little po-
ems in her honor. Slowly the worshipful words and looks became more
physical, with the occasional touch, then a caress, even a kiss—and a kiss
that felt different from any in Liane's experience. One morning, with
Natalie in attendance, Liane prepared to take a bath. As she slipped out
of her nightgown, Natalie suddenly flung herself at her friend's feet, kissing
her ankles. The courtesan freed herself and hurried into the bath, only for
Natalie to throw off her clothes and join her. Within a few days, all Paris
knew that Liane de Pougy had a new lover: Natalie Barney.
Liane made no effort to disguise her new affair, publishing a novel,
Idylle Saphique, detailing every aspect of Natalie's seduction. She had never
had an affair with a woman before, and she described her involvement with
Natalie as something like a mystical experience. Even at the end of her
long life, she remembered the affair as by far her most intense.
Renée Vivien was a young Englishwoman who had come to Paris to
write poetry and flee the marriage that her father was trying to arrange for
her. Renée was obsessed with death; she also felt there was something
wrong with her, experiencing moments of intense self-loathing. In 1900,
Renée met Natalie at the theater. Something about the American's kind
eyes melted Renée's normal reserve, and she began sending poems to Na-
talie, who responded with poems of her own. They soon became friends.
Renée confessed that she had had an intense friendship with another
woman, but that it remained platonic—the thought of physical involve-
ment repulsed her. Natalie told her about the ancient Greek poet Sappho,
who celebrated love between women as the only love that is innocent and
pure. One night Renée, inspired by their discussions, invited Natalie to her
apartment, which she had transformed into a kind of chapel. The room
was filled with candles and with white lilies, the flowers she associated with
Natalie. That night the two women became lovers. They soon moved in
together, but when Renée realized that Natalie could not be faithful to her,
her love turned into hatred. She broke off the relationship, moved out, and
vowed to never see her again.
Over the next few months Natalie sent her letters and poems, and
showed up at her new home—all to no avail. Renée would have nothing to
do with her. One evening at the opera, though, Natalie sat down beside
her and gave her a poem she had written in her honor. She expressed her
regrets for the past, and also a simple request: the two women should go on
a pilgrimage to the Greek island of Lesbos, Sappho's home. Only there
could they purify themselves and their relationship. Renée could not resist.would abandon their
husbands, homes, children,
to follow this Circe of
Lesbos. • Circe's method
was to concoct magic
potions. Natalie preferred
writing poems; she always
knew how to blend the
physical and the spiritual.
—-JEAN CHALON, PORTRAIT OF
A SEDUCTRESS: THE WORLD OF
NATALIE BARNEY, TRANSLATED
BY CAROL BARKO
There once lived in the
town of Gafsa, in Barbary,
a very rich man who had
numerous children, among
them a lovely and graceful
young daughter called
Alibech. She was not
herself a Christian, but
there were many
Christians in the town,
and one day, having on
occasion heard them extol
the Christian faith and the
service of God, she asked
one of them for his opinion
on the best and easiest way
for a person to "serve
God," as they put it. He
answered her by saying
that the ones who served
God best were those who
put the greatest distance
between themselves and
earthly goods, as happened
in the case of people who
had gone to live in the
remoter parts of the
Sahara. • She said no
more about it to anyone,
but next morning, being a
very simple-natured
creature of fourteen or
thereabouts, Alibech set out
all alone, in secret, and
made her way toward the
desert, prompted by
nothing more logical than a
strong adolescent impulse.
A few days later,
exhausted from fatigue and
hunger, she arrived in the
heart of the wilderness,
