Effect a Regression • 339
time. Hugo was a celebrated writer by now, but he was not the calculating
type. He generally wore his heart on his sleeve. Yet he could not confide in
anyone about Adèle's affair; it was too humiliating. His only solution was to
have affairs of his own, with actresses, courtesans, married women. Hugo
had a prodigious appetite, sometimes visiting three different women in the
same day.
Near the end of 1832, production began on one of Hugo's plays, and
he was to supervise the casting. A twenty-six-year-old actress named Juli-
ette Drouet auditioned for one of the smaller roles. Normally quite adroit
with the ladies, Hugo found himself stuttering in Juliette's presence. She
was quite simply the most beautiful woman he had ever seen, and this and
her composed manner intimidated him. Naturally, Juliette won the part.
He found himself thinking about her all the time. She always seemed to be
surrounded by a group of adoring men. Clearly she was not interested in
him, or so he thought. One evening, though, after a performance of the play,
he followed her home, to find that she was neither angry nor surprised—
indeed she invited him up to her apartment. He spent the night, and soon
he was spending almost every night there.
Hugo was happy again. To his delight, Juliette quit her career in the
theater, dropped her former friends, and learned to cook. She had loved
fancy clothes and social affairs; now she became Hugo's secretary, rarely
leaving the apartment in which he had established her and seeming to live
only for his visits. After a while, however, Hugo returned to his old ways
and started to have little affairs on the side. She did not complain—as long
as she remained the one woman he kept returning to. And Hugo had in
fact grown quite dependent on her.
In 1843, Hugo's beloved daughter died in an accident and he sank into
a depression. The only way he knew to get over his grief was to have an af-
fair with someone new. And so, shortly thereafter, he fell in love with a
young married aristocrat named Léonie d'Aunet. He began to see Juliette
less and less. A few years later, Léonie, feeling certain she was the preferred
one, gave him an ultimatum: stop seeing Juliette altogether, or it was over.
Hugo refused. Instead he decided to stage a contest: he would continue to
see both women, and in a few months his heart would tell him which one
he preferred. Léonie was furious, but she had no choice. Her affair with
Hugo had already ruined her marriage and her standing in society; she was
dependent on him. Anyway, how could she lose—she was in the prime of
life, whereas Juliette had gray hair by now. So she pretended to go along
with this contest, but as time went on, she grew increasingly resentful about
it, and complained. Juliette, on the other hand, behaved as if nothing had
changed. Whenever he visited, she treated him as she always had, dropping
everything to comfort and mother him.
The contest lasted several years. In 1851, Hugo was in trouble with
Louis-Napoleon, the cousin of Napoleon Bonaparte and now the president
of France. Hugo had attacked his dictatorial tendencies in the press, bitterly
and perhaps recklessly, for Louis-Napoleon was a vengeful man. Fearing for
340 • The Art of Seduction
the writer's life, Juliette managed to hide him in a friend's house and
arranged for a false passport, a disguise, and safe passage to Brussels. Every-
thing went according to plan; Juliette joined him a few days later, carrying
his most valuable possessions. Clearly her heroic actions had won the con-
test for her.
And yet, after the novelty of Hugo's new life wore off, his affairs re-
sumed. Finally, fearing for his health, and worried that she could no longer
compete with yet another twenty-year-old coquette, Juliette made a calm
but stern demand: no more women or she was leaving him. Taken com-
pletely by surprise, yet certain that she meant every word, Hugo broke
down and sobbed. An old man by now, he got down on his knees and
swore, on the Bible and then on a copy of his famous novel Les Misérables,
that he would stray no more. Until Juliette's death, in 1883, her spell over
him was complete.
Interpretation. Hugo's love life was determined by his relationship with his
mother. He never felt she had loved him enough. Almost all the women he
had affairs with bore a physical resemblance to her; somehow he would
make up for her lack of love for him by sheer volume. When Juliette met
him, she could not have known all this, but she must have sensed two
things: he was extremely disappointed in his wife, and he had never really
grown up. His emotional outbursts and his need for attention made him
more a little boy than a man. She would gain ascendancy over him for the
rest of his life by supplying the one thing he had never had: complete, un-
conditional mother-love.
Juliette never judged Hugo, or criticized him for his naughty ways. She
lavished him with attention; visiting her was like returning to the womb. In
her presence, in fact, he was more a little boy than ever. How could he
refuse her a favor or ever leave her? And when she finally threatened to
leave him, he was reduced to the state of a wailing infant crying for his
mother. In the end she had total power over him.
Unconditional love is rare and hard to find, yet it is what we all crave,
since we either experienced it once or wish we had. You do not have to go
as far as Juliette Drouet; the mere hint of devoted attention, of accepting
your lovers for who they are, of meeting their needs, will place them in an
infantile position. A sense of dependency may frighten them a little, and
they may feel an undercurrent of ambivalence, a need to assert themselves
periodically, as Hugo did through his affairs. But their ties to you will be
strong and they will keep coming back for more, bound by the illusion that
they are recapturing the mother-love they had seemingly lost forever, or
never had.
2. Around the turn of the twentieth century, Professor Mut, a school-
master at a college for young men in a small German town, began to de-
