The Rake • 27
what draws women to you. There are several things you must be known
for: your irresistible attractiveness to women; your uncontrollable devotion
to pleasure (this will make you seem weak, but also exciting to be around);
your disdain for convention; a rebellious streak that makes you seem dan-
gerous. This last element can be slightly hidden; on the surface, be polite
and civil, while letting it be known that behind the scenes you are incorri-
gible. Duke de Richelieu made his conquests as public as possible, exciting
other women's competitive desire to join the club of the seduced. It was by
reputation that Lord Byron attracted his willing victims. A woman may feel
ambivalent about President Clinton's reputation, but beneath that ambiva-
lence is an underlying interest. Do not leave your reputation to chance or
gossip; it is your life's artwork, and you must craft it, hone it, and display it
with the care of an artist.
Symbol: Fire.
The Rake burns with a desire that
enflames the woman he is seducing. It is
extreme, uncontrollable, and dangerous. The Rake may
end in hell, but the flames surrounding him often make
him seem that much more desirable to women.
28 • The Art of Seduction
Dangers
Like the Siren, the Rake faces the most danger from members of his
own sex, who are far less indulgent than women are of his constant
skirt chasing. In the old days, a Rake was often an aristocrat, and no matter
how many people he offended or even killed, in the end he would go un-
punished. Today, only stars and the very wealthy can play the Rake with
impunity; the rest of us need to be careful.
Elvis Presley had been a shy young man. Attaining early stardom, and
seeing the power it gave him over women, he went berserk, becoming a
Rake almost overnight. Like many Rakes, Elvis had a predilection for
women who were already taken. He found himself cornered by an angry
husband or boyfriend on numerous occasions, and came away with a few
cuts and bruises. This might seem to suggest that you should step lightly
around husbands and boyfriends, especially early on in your career. But the
charm of the Rake is that such dangers don't matter to them. You cannot
be a Rake by being fearful and prudent; the occasional pummeling is part
of the game. Later on, in any case, at the height of Elvis's fame, no husband
would dare touch him.
The greater danger for the Rake comes not from the violently offended
husband but from those insecure men who feel threatened by the Don Juan
figure. Although they will not admit it, they envy the Rake's life of plea-
sure, and like everyone envious, they will attack in hidden ways, often
masking their persecutions as morality. The Rake may find his career en-
dangered by such men (or by the occasional woman who is equally inse-
cure, and who feels hurt because the Rake does not want her). There is
little the Rake can do to avoid envy; if everyone was as successful in seduc-
tion, society would not function.
So accept envy as a badge of honor. Don't be naive, be aware. When
attacked by a moralist persecutor, do not be taken in by their crusade; it is
motivated by envy, pure and simple. You can blunt it by being less of a
Rake, asking forgiveness, claiming to have reformed, but this will damage
your reputation, making you seem less lovably rakish. In the end, it is better
to suffer attacks with dignity and keep on seducing. Seduction is the source
of your power; and you can always count on the infinite indulgence of
women.
