256 • The Art of Seduction
Then, a few weeks after their engagement, Johannes sent her a letter. Here
he described the state of his soul, and his certainty that he loved her. He
spoke in metaphor, suggesting that he had been waiting for years, lantern in
hand, for Cordelia's appearance; metaphor melted into reality, back and
forth. The style was poetic, the words glowed with desire, but the whole
was delightfully ambiguous—Cordelia could reread the letter ten times
without being sure what it said. The next day Johannes received a response.
The writing was simple and straightforward, but full of sentiment: his letter
had made her so happy, Cordelia wrote, and she had not imagined this side
to his character. He replied by writing that he had changed. He did not say
how or why, but the implication was that it was because of her.
Now his letters came almost daily. They were mostly of the same
length, in a poetic style that had a touch of madness to it, as if he were in-
toxicated with love. He talked of Greek myth, comparing Cordelia to a
nymph and himself to a river that fell in love with a maiden. His soul, he
said, merely reflected back her image; she was all he could see or think of.
Meanwhile he detected changes in Cordelia: her letters became more po-
etic, less restrained. Without realizing it she repeated his ideas, imitating his
style and his imagery as if they were her own. Also, when they saw each
other in person, she was nervous. He made a point of remaining the same,
aloof and regal, but he could tell that she saw him differently, sensing
depths in him that she could not fathom. In public she hung on his every
word. She must have memorized his letters, for she referred to them con-
stantly in their talks. It was a secret life they shared. When she held his
hand, she did so more tightly than before. Her eyes expressed an impa-
tience, as if she were hoping that at any moment he would do something
bold.
Johannes made his letters shorter but more numerous, sometimes
sending several in one day. The imagery became more physical and more
suggestive, the style more disjointed, as if he could barely organize his
thoughts. Sometimes he sent a note of just a sentence or two. Once, at a
party at Cordelia's house, he dropped such a note into her knitting basket
and watched as she ran away to read it, her face flushed. In her letters he
saw signs of emotion and turmoil. Echoing a sentiment he had hinted at in
an earlier letter, she wrote that she hated the whole engagement business—
it was so beneath their love.
Everything was ready. Soon she would be his, the way he wanted it.
She would break off the engagement. A rendezvous in the country would
be simple to arrange—in fact she would be the one to propose it. This
would be his most skillful seduction.
Interpretation. Johannes and Cordelia are characters in the loosely auto-
biographical novel The Seducer's Diary (1843), by the Danish philosopher
Søren Kierkegaard. Johannes is a most experienced seducer, who specializes
in working on his victim's mind. This is precisely where Cordelia's previousTherefore, the person who
is unable to write letters
and notes never becomes a
dangerous seducer.
—SØREN KIERKEGAARD,
EITHER/OR, TRANSLATED BY
HOWARD V. HONG
AND EDNA H. HONG
Standing on a crag of
Olympus \ Gold-throned
Hera saw her brother, \
Who was her husband's
brother too, \ Busy on the
fields of human glory, \
And her heart sang. Then
she saw Zeus \ Sitting on
the topmost peak of Ida \
And was filled with
resentment. Cow-eyed
Hera \ Mused for a while
on how to trick \ The mind
of Zeus Aegis-holder, \
And the plan that seemed
best to her \ Was to make
herself up and go to Ida, \
Seduce him, and then shed
on his eyelids \ And
cunning mind a sleep
gentle and warm. . . . \
When everything was
perfect, she stepped \ Out
of her room and called
Aphrodite \ And had a
word with her in private: \
"My dear child, will you
do something for me, \ I
wonder, or will you refuse,
angry because \ I favor the
Greeks and you the
Trojans?" \ And Zeus'
daughter Aphrodite
replied: \ "Goddess revered
as Cronus's daughter, \
Speak your mind. Tell me
what you want \And I'll
oblige you if I possibly
can." \And Hera, with
every intention to deceive: \
"Give me now the Sex
and Desire \ You use to
subdue immortals and
humans. ..." \And
Aphrodite, who loved to
smile: \ "How could I, or
would I, refuse someone \
Who sleeps in the anus of
Use the Demonic Power of Words to Sow Confusion • 257
suitors have failed: they have begun by imposing themselves, a common
mistake. We think that by being persistent, by overwhelming our targets
with romantic attention, we are convincing them of our affection. Instead
we are convincing them of our impatience and insecurity. Aggressive atten-
tion is not flattering because it is not personalized. It is unbridled libido at
work; the target sees through it. Johannes is too clever to begin so obvi-
ously. Instead, he takes a step back, intriguing Cordelia by acting a little
cold, and carefully creating the impression of a formal, somewhat secretive
man. Only then does he surprise her with his first letter. Obviously there is
more to him than she has thought, and once she has come to believe this,
her imagination runs rampant. Now he can intoxicate her with his letters,
creating a presence that haunts her like a ghost. His words, with their im-
ages and poetic references, are constantly in her mind. And this is the ulti-
mate seduction: to possess her mind before moving to conquer her body.
The story of Johannes shows what a weapon in a seducer's armory a
letter can be. But it is important to learn how to incorporate letters in se-
duction. It is best not to begin your correspondence until at least several
weeks after your initial contact. Let your victims get an impression of you:
you seem intriguing, yet you show no particular interest in them. When
you sense that they are thinking about you, that is the time to hit them
with your first letter. Any desire you express for them will come as a sur-
prise; their vanity will be tickled and they will want more. Now make your
letters frequent, in fact more frequent than your personal appearances. This
will give them the time and space to idealize you, which would be more
difficult if you were always in their face. After they have fallen under your
spell, you can always take a step back, making the letters fewer—let them
think you are losing interest and they will be hungry for more.
Design your letters as homages to your targets. Make everything you
write come back to them, as if they were all you could think about—a
delirious effect. If you tell an anecdote, make it somehow relate to them.
Your correspondence is a kind of mirror you are holding up to them—they
get to see themselves reflected through your desire. If for some reason they
do not like you, write to them as if they did. Remember: the tone of your
letters is what will get under their skin. If your language is elevated, poetic,
creative in its praise, it will infect them despite themselves. Never argue,
never defend yourself, never accuse them of being heartless. That would
ruin the spell.
A letter can suggest emotion by seeming disordered, rambling from one
subject to another. Clearly it is hard for you to think; your love has un-
hinged you. Disordered thoughts are exciting thoughts. Do not waste time
on real information; focus on feelings and sensations, using expressions that
are ripe with connotation. Plant ideas by dropping hints, writing sugges-
tively without explaining yourself. Never lecture, never seem intellectual or
superior—you will only make yourself pompous, which is deadly. Far bet-
ter to speak colloquially, though with a poetic edge to lift the language
above the commonplace. Do not become sentimental—it is tiring, and tooalmighty Zeus?" \ And
with that she unbound
from her breast \ An ornate
sash inlaid with magical
charms. \ Sex is in it, and
Desire, and seductive \
Sweet Talk, that fools even
the wise. . . . \ Hera was
fast approaching Gargarus,
\ Ida's highest peak, when
Zeus saw her. \ And when
he saw her, lust enveloped
him, \ Just as it had the
first time they made love, \
Slipping off to bed behind
their parents' backs. \ He
stood close to her and said:
\ "Hera, why have you left
Olympus? \ And where are
your horses and chariot?" \
And Hera, with every
intention to deceive: \ "I'm
off to visit the ends of the
earth \ And Father Ocean
and Mother Tethys \ Who
nursed and doted on me in
their house. . . . " \ And
Zeus, clouds scudding
about him: \ "You can go
there later just as well. \
Let's get in bed now ami
make love. \ No goddess or
woman has ever \ Made
me feel so overwhelmed
with lust. . . . \ I've never
loved anyone as I love you
now, \ Never been in the
grip of desire so sweet. " \
And Hera, with every
intention to deceive: \
"What a thing to say, my
awesome lord. \ The
thought of us lying down
here on Ida \ Ami making
love outdoors in broad
daylight! \ What if one of
the Immortals saw us \
Asleep, and went to all the
other gods \Aud told
them? I could never get up
\ And go back home. It
would be shameful. \ But if
you really do want to do
this, \ There is the bedroom
your dear son Hephaestus \
Built for you, with good
solid doors. Let's go \
There and lie down, since
you're in the mood. " \
