
Psychological Traits of the Natural
Children are not as guileless as we like to imagine. They suffer from
feelings of helplessness, and sense early on the power of their natural
charm to remedy their weakness in the adult world. They learn to play a
game: if their natural innocence can persuade a parent to yield to their de-
sires in one instance, then it is something they can use strategically in an-
other instance, laying it on thick at the right moment to get their way. If
their vulnerability and weakness is so attractive, then it is something they
can use for effect.
Why are we seduced by children's naturalness? First, because anything
natural has an uncanny effect on us. Since the beginning of time, natural
phenomena—such as lightning storms or eclipses—have instilled in human
beings an awe tinged with fear. The more civilized we become, the greater
the effect such natural events have on us; the modern world surrounds us
with so much that is manufactured and artificial that something sudden and
inexplicable fascinates us. Children also have this natural power, but be-
cause they are unthreatening and human, they are not so much awe inspir-
ing as charming. Most people try to please, but the pleasantness of the child
comes effortlessly, defying logical explanation—and what is irrational is
often dangerously seductive.
More important, a child represents a world from which we have been
forever exiled. Because adult life is full of boredom and compromise, we
harbor an illusion of childhood as a kind of golden age, even though it can
often be a period of great confusion and pain. It cannot be denied, how-
ever, that childhood had certain privileges, and as children we had a plea-
surable attitude to life. Confronted with a particularly charming child, we
often feel wistful: we remember our own golden past, the qualities we have
lost and wish we had again. And in the presence of the child, we get a little
of that goldenness back.
Natural seducers are people who somehow avoided getting certain
childish traits drummed out of them by adult experience. Such people can
be as powerfully seductive as any child, because it seems uncanny and mar-
velous that they have preserved such qualities. They are not literally like
children, of course; that would make them obnoxious or pitiful. Rather it
is the spirit that they have retained. Do not imagine that this childishness is
something beyond their control. Natural seducers learn early on the value
of retaining a particular quality, and the seductive power it contains; theyLong-past ages have a
great and often puzzling
attraction for men's
imagination. Whenever
they are dissatisfied with
their present surround-
ings—and this happens
often enough—they turn
back to the past and hope
that they will now be able
to prove the truth of the
inextinguishable dream of
a golden age. They are
probably still under the
spell of their childhood,
which is presented to them
by their not impartial
memory as a time of
uninterrupted bliss.
—SIGMUND FREUD, THE
STASDARD EDITION OF THE
COMPLETE PSYCHOLOGICAL
WORKS OF SIGMUND FREUD,
VOLUME 23
When Hermes was born
on Mount Cyllene his
mother Maia laid him in
swaddling bands on a
winnowing fan, but he
grew with astonishing
quickness into a little boy,
and as soon as her back
was turned, slipped off and
went looking for adventure.
Arrived at Pieria, where
Apollo was tending a fine
herd of cows, he decided to
55
