184 • The Art of Seduction
Symbol: The Spider's Web. The spider finds an innocuous corner in
which to spin its web. The longer the web takes, the more fabulous
its construction, yet few really notice it—its gossamer threads are
nearly invisible. The spider has no need to chase for food, or
even to move. It quietly sits in the corner, waiting for its
victims to come to it on their own, and ensnare
themselves in the web.
Reversal
In warfare, you need space to align your troops, room to maneuver. The
more space you have, the more intricate your strategy can be. But some-
times it is better to overwhelm the enemy, giving them no time to think or
react. Although Casanova adapted his strategies to the woman in question,
he would often try to make an immediate impression, stirring her desire at
the first encounter. Perhaps he would perform some gallantry, rescuing a
woman in danger; perhaps he would dress so that his target would notice
him in a crowd. In either case, once he had the woman's attention he
would move with lightning speed. A Siren like Cleopatra tries to have an
immediate physical effect on men, giving her victims no time or space to
retreat. She uses the element of surprise. The first period of your contact
with someone can involve a level of desire that will never be repeated;
boldness will carry the day.
But these are short seductions. The Sirens and the Casanovas only get
pleasure from the number of their victims, moving quickly from conquest
to conquest, and this can be tiring. Casanova burned himself out; Sirens,
insatiable, are never satisfied. The indirect, carefully constructed seduction
may reduce the number of your conquests, but more than compensate by
their quality.and caprice of which love is
capable.
—IBN HAZM; THE RING OF
THE DOVE: A TREATISE ON THE
ART AND PRACTICE OF ARAB
LOVE, TRANSLATED BY A. J.
ARBERRY
Send Mixed Signals
Once people are aware of your presence, and
perhaps vaguely intrigued, you need to stir their
interest before it settles on someone else. What is ob-
vious and striking may attract their attention at first, but
that attention is often short-lived; in the long run, ambi-
guity is much more potent. Most of us are much too obvi-
ous—instead, be hard to figure out. Send mixed signals:
both tough and tender, both spiritual and earthy, both inno-
cent and cunning. A mix of qualities suggests depth, which
fascinates even as it confuses. An elusive, enigmatic aura
will make people want to know more, drawing them
into your circle. Create such a power by hinting
at something contradictory within you.
