The Rake • 23
Never a hurried, jerky gesture. . . . He played upon the emotions of the
crowd as a supreme violinist does upon a Stradivarius. The eyes of the
thousands were fixed upon him as though hypnotized by his power." Once
again, it was the sound of the voice and the poetic connotations of the
words that seduced the masses. Arguing that modern Italy should reclaim
the greatness of the Roman Empire, D'Annunzio would craft slogans for
the audience to repeat, or would ask emotionally loaded questions for them
to answer. He flattered the crowd, made them feel they were part of some
drama. Everything was vague and suggestive.
The issue of the day was the ownership of the city of Fiume, just across
the border in neighboring Yugoslavia. Many Italians believed that Italy's re-
ward for siding with the Allies in the recent war should be the annexation
of Fiume. D'Annunzio championed this cause, and because of his status as
a war hero the army was ready to side with him, although the government
opposed any action. In September of 1919, with soldiers rallying around
him, D'Annunzio led his infamous march on Fiume. When an Italian gen-
eral stopped him along the way, and threatened to shoot him, D'Annunzio
opened his coat to show his medals, and said in his magnetic voice, "If you
must kill me, fire first on this!" The general stood there stunned, then
broke into tears. He joined up with D'Annunzio.
When D'Annunzio entered Fiume, he was greeted as a liberator. The
next day he was declared leader of the Free State of Fiume. Soon he was
giving daily speeches from a balcony overlooking the town's main square,
holding tens of thousands of people spellbound without benefit of loud-
speakers. He initiated all kinds of celebrations and rituals harking back to
the Roman Empire. The citizens of Fiume began to imitate him, particu-
larly his sexual exploits; the city became like a giant bordello. His popu-
larity was so high that the Italian government feared a march on Rome,
which at that point, had D'Annunzio decided to do it—and he had the
support of a large part of the military—might actually have succeeded;
D'Annunzio could have beaten Mussolini to the punch and changed the
course of history. (He was not a Fascist, but a kind of aesthetic socialist.)
He decided to stay in Fiume, however, and ruled there for sixteen months
before the Italian government finally bombed him out of the city.
Seduction is a psychological process that transcends gender, except in a few
key areas where each gender has its own weakness. The male is traditionally
vulnerable to the visual. The Siren who can concoct the right physical ap-
pearance will seduce in large numbers. For women the weakness is lan-
guage and words: as was written by one of D'Annunzio's victims, the
French actress Simone, "How can one explain his conquests except by his
extraordinary verbal power, and the musical timbre of his voice, put to the
service of exceptional eloquence? For my sex is susceptible to words, be-
witched by them, longing to be dominated by them."
The Rake is as promiscuous with words as he is with women. He
chooses words for their ability to suggest, insinuate, hypnotize, elevate, in-Among the many modes of
handling Don Juan's effect
on women, the motif of the
irresistible hero is worth
singling out, for it
illustrates a curious change
in our sensibility. Don
Juan did not become
irresistible to women until
the Romantic age, and I
am disposed to think that
it is a trait of the female
imagination to make him
so. When the female voice
began to assert itself and
even, perhaps, to dominate
in literature, Don Juan
evolved to become the
women's rather than the
man's ideal. . . . Don
Juan is now the woman's
dream of the perfect lover,
fugitive, passionate, daring.
He gives her the one
unforgettable moment, the
magnificent exaltation of
the flesh which is too often
denied her by the real
husband, who thinks that
men are gross and women
spiritual. To be the fatal
Don Juan may be the
dream of a few men; but to
meet him is the dream of
many women.
—OSCAR MANDEL,"THE
LEGEND OF DON JUAN," THE
THEATRE OF DON JUAN
24 • The Art of Seduction
feet. The words of the Rake are the equivalent of the bodily adornment of
the Siren: a powerful sensual distraction, a narcotic. The Rake's use of lan-
guage is demonic because it is designed not to communicate or convey in-
formation but to persuade, flatter, stir emotional turmoil, much as the
serpent in the Garden of Eden used words to lead Eve into temptation.
The example of D'Annunzio reveals the link between the erotic Rake,
who seduces women, and the political Rake, who seduces the masses. Both
depend on words. Adapt the character of the Rake and you will find that
the use of words as a subtle poison has infinite applications. Remember: it
is the form that matters, not the content. The less your targets focus on
what you say, and the more on how it makes them feel, the more seductive
your effect. Give your words a lofty, spiritual, literary flavor the better to in-
sinuate desire in your unwitting victims.
But what is this force, then, by which Don Juan seduces?
It is desire, the energy of sensuous desire. He desires in
every woman the whole of womanhood. The reaction to
this gigantic passion beautifies and develops the one de-
sired, who flushes in enhanced beauty by his reflection. As
the enthusiast's fire with seductive splendor illumines even
those who stand in a casual relation to him, so Don Juan
transfigures in a far deeper sense every girl.
—SØREN KIERKEGAARD, EITHER/OR
Keys to the Character
At first it may seem strange that a man who is clearly dishonest, disloyal,
and has no interest in marriage would have any appeal to a woman.
But throughout all of history, and in all cultures, this type has had a fatal ef-
fect. What the Rake offers is what society normally does not allow women:
an affair of pure pleasure, an exciting brush with danger. A woman is often
deeply oppressed by the role she is expected to play She is supposed to be
the tender, civilizing force in society, and to want commitment and lifelong
loyalty. But often her marriages and relationships give her not romance and
devotion but routine and an endlessly distracted mate. It remains an abiding
female fantasy to meet a man who gives totally of himself, who lives for
her, even if only for a while.
This dark, repressed side of female desire found expression in the leg-
end of Don Juan. At first the legend was a male fantasy: the adventurous
knight who could have any woman he wanted. But in the seventeenth and
eighteenth centuries, Don Juan slowly evolved from the masculine adven-
turer to a more feminized version: a man who lived only for women. This
evolution came from women's interest in the story, and was a result of their
frustrated desires. Marriage for them was a form of indentured servitude;
but Don Juan offered pleasure for its own sake, desire with no strings at-
