336 • The Art of Seduction
tion. The method has infinite applications outside psychoanalysis. To prac-
tice it in real life, you need to play the therapist, encouraging people to talk
about their childhood. Most of us are only too happy to oblige; and our
memories are so vivid and emotional that a part of us regresses just in talk-
ing about our early years. Also, in the course of talking, little secrets slip
out: we reveal all kinds of valuable information about our weaknesses and
our mental makeup, information you must attend to and remember. Do
not take your targets' words at face value; they will often sugarcoat or over-
dramatize events in childhood. But pay attention to their tone of voice, to
any nervous tics as they talk, and particularly to anything they do not want
to talk about, anything they deny or that makes them emotional. Many state-
ments actually mean their opposite: should they say they hated their father,
for instance, you can be sure that they are hiding a lot of disappointment—
that they actually loved their father only too much, and perhaps never quite
got what they wanted from him. Listen closely for recurring themes and
stories. Most important, learn to analyze emotional responses and see what
lies behind them.
While they talk, maintain the therapist's pose—attentive but quiet,
making occasional, nonjudgmental comments. Be caring yet distant—
somewhat blank, in fact—and they will begin to transfer emotions and pro-
ject fantasies onto you. With the information you have gathered about their
childhood, and the trusting bond you have forged, you can now begin to
effect the regression. Perhaps you have uncovered a powerful attachment to
a parent, a sibling, a teacher, or any early infatuation, a person who casts a
shadow over their present lives. Knowing what it was about this person that
affected them so powerfully, you can now take over that role. Or perhaps
you have learned of an immense gap in their childhood—a neglectful fa-
ther, for instance. You act like that parent now, but you replace the original
neglect with the attention and affection that the real parent never supplied.
Everyone has unfinished business from childhood—disappointments, lacks,
painful memories. Finish what is unfinished. Discover what your target
never got and you have the ingredients for a deep-rooted seduction.
The key is not just to talk about memories—that is weak. What you
want is to get people to act out in their present old issues from their past,
without their being aware of what is happening. The regressions you can
effect fall into four main types.
The Infantile Regression. The first bond—the bond between a mother
and her infant—is the most powerful one. Unlike other animals, human ba-
bies have a long period of helplessness during which they are dependent on
their mother, creating an attachment that influences the rest of their lives.
The key to effecting this regression is to reproduce the sense of uncondi-
tional love a mother has for her child. Never judge your targets—let them
do whatever they want, including behaving badly; at the same time sur-
round them with loving attention, smother them with comfort. A part ofmothers, and sometimes
wives. ...•... A
magazine called Young
Lady featured an article
(January 1982) on "how
to make ourselves
beautiful." How, in other
words, to attract men. An
American or European
magazine would then go
on to tell the reader how to
be sexually desirable, no
doubt suggesting various
puffs, creams, and sprays.
Not so with Young Lady.
"The most attractive
women," it informs us,
"are women full of
maternal love. Women
without maternal love are
the types men never want
to marry. . . . One has to
look at men through the
eyes of a mother. "
—IAN BURUMA, BEHIND THE
MASK: ON SEXUAL DEMONS,
SACRED MOTHERS,
TRANSVESTITES, GANGSTERS,
DRIFTERS AND OTHER
JAPANESE CULTURAL HEROES
I have stressed the fact that
the beloved person is a
substitute for the ideal ego.
Two people who love each
other are interchanging
. their ego-ideals. That they
love each other means they
love the ideal of themselves
in the other one. There
would be no love on earth
if this phantom were not
there. We fall in love
because we cannot attain
the image that is our better
self and the best of our self
From this concept it is
obvious that love itself is
only possible on a certain
cultural level or after a
certain phase in the
development of the
personality has been
reached. The creation of an
ego-ideal itself marks
human progress. When
people are entirely satisfied
Effect a Regression • 331
them will regress to those earliest years when their mother took care of
everything and rarely left them alone. This works on almost everyone, for
unconditional love is the rarest and most treasured form. You do not even
have to tailor your behavior to anything specific in their childhood; most of
us have experienced this kind of attention. Meanwhile, create atmospheres
that reinforce the feeling you are generating—warm environments, playful
activities, bright, happy colors.
The Oedipal Regression. After the bond between mother and child
comes the oedipal triangle of mother, father, and child. This triangle forms
during the period of the child's earliest erotic fantasies. A boy wants his
mother to himself, a girl does the same with her father, but they never
quite have it that way, for a parent will always have competing connections
to a spouse or to other adults. Unconditional love has gone; now, inevita-
bly, the parent must sometimes deny what the child desires. Transport your
victims back to this period. Play a parental role, be loving, but also some-
times scold and instill some discipline. Children actually love a little
discipline—it makes them feel that the adult cares about them. And adult
children too will be thrilled if you mix your tenderness with a little tough-
ness and punishment.
Unlike infantile regression, oedipal regression must be tailored to your
target. It depends on the information you have gathered. Without knowing
enough, you might treat a person like a child, scolding them now and then,
only to discover that you are stirring up ugly memories—they had too
much discipline as child. Or you might stir up memories of a parent they
loathed, and they will transfer those feelings to you. Do not go ahead
with the regression until you have learned everything you can about their
childhood—what they had too much of, what they lacked, and so on. If
the target was strongly attached to a parent, but that attachment was par-
tially negative, the oedipal regression strategy can still be quite effective. We
always feel ambivalent toward a parent; even as we love them, we resent
having had to depend on them. Don't worry about stirring up these am-
bivalences, which don't keep us from being tied to our parents. Remember
to include an erotic component in your parental behavior. Now your tar-
gets are not only getting their mother or father all to themselves, they are
getting something more, something previously forbidden but now allowed.
The Ego Ideal Regression. As children, we often form an ideal figure out
of our dreams and ambitions. First, that ideal figure is the person we want
to be. We imagine ourselves as brave adventurers, romantic figures. Then,
in our adolescence, we turn our attention to others, often projecting our
ideals onto them. The first boy or girl we fall in love with may seem to
have the ideal qualities we wanted for ourselves, or else may make us feel
that we can play that ideal role in relation to them. Most of us carry thesewith their actual selves,
love is impossible. • The
transfer of the ego-ideal to
a person is the most
characteristic trait of love.
—THEODOR REIK, OF LOVE
AND LUST
I gave [Sylphide] the eyes
of one girl in the village,
the fresh complexion of
another. The portraits of
great ladies of the time of
Francis I, Henry IV, and
Louis XIV, hanging in our
drawing room, lent me
other features, and I even
borrowed beauties from the
pictures of the Madonna in
the churches. This magic
creature followed me
invisibly everywhere, I
conversed with her as if
with a real person; she
changed her appearance
according to the degree of
my madness; Aphrodite
without a veil, Diana
shrouded in azure and
rose, Thalia in a laughing
mask, Hebe with the goblet
of youth—or she became a
fairy, giving me dominion
over nature. . . . The
delusion lasted two whole
years, in the course of
which my soul attained the
highest peak of exaltation.
—CHATEAUBRIAND, MEMOIRS
FROM BEYOND THE GRAVE,
QUOTED IN FRIEDRICH SIEBURG,
CHATEAUBRIAND, TRANSLATED
BY VIOLET M. MACDONALD
