44 • The Art of Seduction
that borders on rape. When she asks, "Why have you brought me here?,"
he replies, "Are you not woman enough to know?" Yet she ends up falling
in love with him, as indeed women did in movie audiences all over the
world, thrilling at his strange blend of the feminine and the masculine. In
one scene in The Sheik, the English lady points a gun at Valentino; his re-
sponse is to point a delicate cigarette holder back at her. She wears pants;
he wears long flowing robes and abundant eye makeup. Later films would
include scenes of Valentino dressing and undressing, a kind of striptease
showing glimpses of his trim body. In almost all of his films he played some
exotic period character—a Spanish bullfighter, an Indian rajah, an Arab
sheik, a French nobleman—and he seemed to delight in dressing up in jew-
els and tight uniforms.
In the 1920s, women were beginning to play with a new sexual free-
dom. Instead of waiting for a man to be interested in them, they wanted to
be able to initiate the affair, but they still wanted the man to end up sweep-
ing them off their feet. Valentino understood this perfectly. His off-screen
life corresponded to his movie image: he wore bracelets on his arm, dressed
impeccably, and reportedly was cruel to his wife, and hit her. (His adoring
public carefully ignored his two failed marriages and his apparently nonex-
istent sex life.) When he suddenly died—in New York in August 1926, at
the age of thirty-one, from complications after surgery for an ulcer—the
response was unprecedented: more than 100,000 people filed by his coffin,
many female mourners became hysterical, and the whole nation was spell-
bound. Nothing like this had happened before for a mere actor.
There is a film of Valentino's, Monsieur Beaucaire, in which he plays a total
fop, a much more effeminate role than he normally played, and without his
usual hint of dangerousness. The film was a flop. Women did not respond
to Valentino as a swish. They were thrilled by the ambiguity of a man who
shared many of their own feminine traits, yet remained a man. Valentino
dressed and played with his physicality like a woman, but his image was
masculine. He wooed as a woman would woo if she were a man—slowly,
attentively, paying attention to details, setting a rhythm instead of hurrying
to a conclusion. Yet when the time came for boldness and conquest, his
timing was impeccable, overwhelming his victim and giving her no chance
to protest. In his movies, Valentino practiced the same gigolo's art of leading
a woman on that he had mastered as a teenager on the dance floor—
chatting, flirting, pleasing, but always in control.
Valentino remains an enigma to this day. His private life and his charac-
ter are wrapped in mystery; his image continues to seduce as it did during
his lifetime. He served as the model for Elvis Presley, who was obsessed
with this star of the silents, and also for the modern male dandy who plays
with gender but retains an edge of danger and cruelty.
Seduction was and will always remain the female form of power and
warfare. It was originally the antidote to rape and violence. The man who
uses this form of power on a woman is in essence turning the game around,god. If you are, perhaps
you may be Cupid? . . . If
there is such a girl [engaged
to you], let me enjoy your
love in secret: but if there is
not, then I pray that I may
be your bride, and that we
may enter upon marriage
together." The naiad said
no more; but a blush
stained the boy's cheeks, for
he did not know what love
was. Even blushing became
him: his cheeks were the
colour of ripe apples,
hanging in a sunny orchard,
like painted ivory or like
the moon when, in eclipse,
she shows a reddish hue
beneath her brightness. . . .
Incessantly the nymph
demanded at least sisterly
kisses, and tried to put her
arms round his ivory neck.
"Will you stop!" he cried,
"or I shall run away and
leave this place and you!"
Salmacis was afraid: "1
yield the spot to you,
stranger, I shall not
intrude," she said; and,
turning from him, pretended
to go away. . . . The boy,
meanwhile, thinking
himself unobserved and
alone, strolled this way and
that on the grassy sward,
and dipped his toes in the
lapping water—then his
feet, up to the ankles.
Then, tempted by the
enticing coolness of the
waters, he quickly stripped
his young body of its soft
garments. At the sight,
Salmacis was spell-bound.
She was on fire with
passion to possess his
naked beauty, and her very
eyes flamed with a
brilliance like that of the
dazzling sun, when his
bright disc is reflected in a
mirror. . . . She longed to
embrace him then, and
with difficulty restrained
her frenzy.
Hermaphroditus, clapping
his hollow palms against
The Dandy • 45
employing feminine weapons against her; without losing his masculine
identity, the more subtly feminine he becomes the more effective the se-
duction. Do not be one of those who believe that what is most seductive is
being devastatingly masculine. The Feminine Dandy has a much more sin-
ister effect. He lures the woman in with exactly what she wants—a familiar,
pleasing, graceful presence. Mirroring feminine psychology, he displays at-
tention to his appearance, sensitivity to detail, a slight coquettishness—but
also a hint of male cruelty. Women are narcissists, in love with the charms
of their own sex. By showing them feminine charm, a man can mesmerize
and disarm them, leaving them vulnerable to a bold, masculine move.
The Feminine Dandy can seduce on a mass scale. No single woman
really possesses him—he is too elusive—but all can fantasize about doing so.
The key is ambiguity: your sexuality is decidedly heterosexual, but your
body and psychology float delightfully back and forth between the two
poles.
I am a woman. Every artist is a woman and should have a
taste for other women. Artists who are homosexual cannot
be true artists because they like men, and since they them-
selves are women they are reverting to normality.
—PABLO PICASSO
The Masculine Dandy
In the 1870s, Pastor Henrik Gillot was the darling of the St. Petersburg
intelligentsia. He was young, handsome, well-read in philosophy and lit-
erature, and he preached a kind of enlightened Christianity. Dozens of
young girls had crushes on him and would flock to his sermons just to look
at him. In 1878, however, he met a girl who changed his life. Her name
was Lou von Salomé (later known as Lou Andreas-Salomé), and she was
seventeen; he was forty-two.
Salomé was pretty, with radiant blue eyes. She had read a lot, particu-
larly for a girl her age, and was interested in the gravest philosophical and
religious issues. Her intensity, her intelligence, her responsiveness to ideas
cast a spell over Gillot. When she entered his office for her increasingly fre-
quent discussions with him, the place seemed brighter and more alive. Per-
haps she was flirting with him, in the unconscious manner of a young
girl—yet when Gillot admitted to himself that he was in love with her, and
proposed marriage, Salomé was horrified. The confused pastor never quite
got over Lou von Salomé, becoming the first of a long string of famous
men to be the victim of a lifelong unfulfilled infatuation with her.
In 1882, the German philosopher Friedrich Nietzsche was wandering
around Italy alone. In Genoa he received a letter from his friend Paul Rée,
a Prussian philosopher whom he admired, recounting his discussions with a
remarkable young Russian woman, Lou von Salomé, in Rome. Salomé washis body, dived quickly into
the stream. As he raised
first one arm and then the
other, his body gleamed in
the clear water, as if
someone had encased
anivory statue or white
lilies in transparent glass.
"I have won! He is
mine!" cried the nymph,
and flinging aside her
garments, plunged into the
heart of the pool. The boy
fought against her, but she
held him, and snatched
kisses as he struggled,
placing her hands beneath
him, stroking
his unwilling breast, and
clinging to him, now on
this side, and now on that.
• Finally, in spite of ail his
efforts to slip from her
grasp, she twined around
him, like a serpent when it
is being carried off into the
air by the king of birds: for,
as it hangs from the eagle's
beak, the snake coils round
his head and talons and
with its tail hampers his
beating wings. . . ."You
may fight, you rogue, but
you will not escape. May
the gods grant me this, may
no time to come ever
separate him from me, or
me from him!" Her prayers
found favour with the gods:
for, as they lay together,
their bodies were united
and from being two persons
they became one. As when
a gardener grafts a branch
on to a tree, and sees the
two unite as they grow,
and come to maturity
together, so when their
limbs met in that clinging
embrace the nymph and the
boy were no longer two, but
a single form, possessed of
a dual nature, which could
not be called male or
female, but seemed to be at
once both and neither.
—OVID, METAMORPHOSES,
TRANSLATED BY MARY M. INNES
