Contents
Acknowlegments • ix
Preface • xix
Part One
The Seductive Character page 1
The Siren page 5
A man is often secretly oppressed by the role he has to play—by always having to be responsi-
ble, in control, and rational. The Siren is the ultimate male fantasy figure because she offers a
total release from the limitations of his life. In her presence, which is always heightened and
sexually charged, the male feels transported to a realm of pure pleasure. In a world where
women are often too timid to project such an image, learn to take control of the male libido by
embodying his fantasy.
The Rake page 17
A woman never quite feels desired and appreciated enough. She wants attention, but a man is
too often distracted and unresponsive. The Rake is a great female fantasy-figure—when he de-
sires a woman, brief though that moment may be, he will go to the ends of the earth for her.
He may be disloyal, dishonest, and amoral, but that only adds to his appeal. Stir a woman's
repressed longings by adapting the Rake's mix of danger and pleasure.
The Ideal Lover page 29
Most people have dreams in their youth that get shattered or worn down with age. They find
themselves disappointed by people, events, reality, which cannot match their youthful ideals.
Ideal Lovers thrive on people's broken dreams, which become lifelong fantasies. You long for ro-
mance? Adventure? Lofty spiritual communion? The Ideal Lover reflects your fantasy. He or
she is an artist in creating the illusion you require. In a world of disenchantment and baseness,
there is limitless seductive power in following the path of the Ideal Lover.
xi
xii • Contents
The Dandy page 41
Most of us feel trapped within the limited roles that the world expects us to play. We are in-
stantly attracted to those who are more fluid than we are—those who create their own persona.
Dandies excite us because they cannot be categorized, and hint at a freedom we want for our-
selves. They play with masculinity and femininity; they fashion their own physical image,
which is always startling. Use the power of the Dandy to create an ambiguous, alluring pres-
ence that stirs repressed desires.
The Natural page 53
Childhood is the golden paradise we are always consciously or unconsciously trying to re-create.
The Natural embodies the longed-for qualities of childhood—spontaneity, sincerity, unpre-
tentiousness. In the presence of Naturals, we feel at ease, caught up in their playful spirit,
transported back to that golden age. Adopt the pose of the Natural to neutralize people's
defensivencss and infect them with helpless delight.
The Coquette page 67
The ability to delay satisfaction is the ultimate art of seduction—while waiting, the victim is
held in thrall. Coquettes are the grand masters of the game, orchestrating a back-and-forth
movement between hope and frustration. They bait with the promise of reward—the hope of
physical pleasure, happiness, fame by association, power—all of which, however, proves elu-
sive; yet this only makes their targets pursue them the more. Imitate the alternating heat and
coolness of the Coquette and you will keep the seduced at your heels.
The Charmer page 79
Charm is seduction without sex. Charmers are consummate manipulators, masking their clev-
erness by creating a mood of pleasure and comfort. Their method is simple: They deflect atten-
tion from themselves and focus it on their target. They understand your spirit, feel your pain,
adapt to your moods. In the presence of a Charmer you feel better about yourself. Learn to cast
the Charmer's spell by aiming at people's primary weaknesses: vanity and self-esteem.
The Charismatic page 95
Charisma is a presence that excites us. It comes from an inner quality—self-confidence, sexual
energy, sense of purpose, contentment—that most people lack and want. This quality radiates
outward, permeating the gestures of Charismatics, making them seem extraordinary and supe-
rior. They learn to heighten their charisma with a piercing gaze, fiery oratory, an air of mys-
tery. Create the charismatic illusion by radiating intensity while remaining detached.
The Star page 119
Daily life is harsh, and most of us constantly seek escape from it in fantasies and dreams. Stars
feed on this weakness; standing out from others through a distinctive and appealing style, they
make us want to watch them. At the same time, they are vague and ethereal, keeping their
distance, and letting us imagine more than is there. Their dreamlike quality works on our un-
conscious. Learn to become an object of fascination by projecting the glittering but elusive pres-
ence of the Star.
