408 • The Art of Seduction
meeting, and so, one late afternoon in Paris, Valmont found himself once
again alone with Tourvel, in a room in her house.
The Présidente was clearly on edge; she could not look him in the eye.
They exchanged pleasantries, but then Valmont turned harsh: she had
treated him cruelly, had apparently been determined to make him unhappy.
Well, this was the end, they were separating for good, since that was how
she wanted it. Tourvel argued back: she was a married woman, she had no
choice. Valmont softened his tone and apologized: he was unused to having
such strong feelings, he said, and could not control himself. Still, he would
never trouble her again. Then he laid on a table the letters he had come to
return.
Tourvel came closer: the sight of her letters, and the memory of all the
turmoil they represented, affected her powerfully. She had thought his de-
cision to renounce his libertine way of life was voluntary, she said—with a
touch of bitterness in her voice, as if she resented being abandoned. No, it
was not voluntary, he replied, it was because she had spurned him. Then
he suddenly stepped closer and took her in his arms. She did not resist.
"Adorable woman!" he cried. "You have no idea of the love you inspire.
You will never know how I have worshipped you, how much dearer my
feelings have been to me than life! . . . May [your days] be blessed with all
of the happiness of which you have deprived me!" Then he let her go and
turned to leave.
Tourvel suddenly snapped. "You shall listen to me. I insist," she said,
and grabbed his arm. He turned around and they embraced. This time he
waited no longer, picking her up, carrying her to an ottoman, overwhelm-
ing her with kisses and sweet words of the happiness he now felt. Before
this sudden flood of caresses, all her resistance gave way. "From this mo-
ment on I am yours," she said, "and you will hear neither refusals nor re-
grets from my lips." Tourvel was true to her word, and Valmont's suspicions
were to prove correct: the pleasures he won from her were far greater than
with any other woman he had seduced.
Interpretation. Valmont—a character in Choderlos de Laclos's eighteenth-
century novel Dangerous Liaisons—can sense several things about the Prési-
dente at first glance. She is timid and nervous. Her husband almost
certainly treats her with respect—probably too much of it. Beneath her in-
terest in God, religion, and virtue is a passionate woman, vulnerable to the
lure of a romance and to the flattering attention of an ardent suitor. No
one, not even her husband, has given her this feeling, because they have all
been so daunted by her prudish exterior.
Valmont begins his seduction, then, by being indirect. He knows
Tourvel is secretly fascinated with his bad reputation. By acting as if he is
contemplating a change in his life, he can make her want to reform him—a
desire that is unconsciously a desire to love him. Once she has opened up
ever so slightly to his influence, he strikes at her vanity: she has never felthumble poacher to kill the
stag where he has surprised
it in its hiding place;
the true hunter will
bring it to bay.
—VICOMTE DE VALMONT,
IN CHODERLOS DE LACLOS,
DANGEROUS LIAISONS,
TRANSLATED BY P.W.K. STONE,
IN MICHEL FEHER, ED.,
THE LIBERTINE READER
Don't you know that
however willing, however
eager we are to give
ourselves, we must
nevertheless have an
excuse? And is there any
more convenient than an
appearance of yielding to
force? As for me, I shall
admit that one thing that
most flatters me is a lively
and well-executed attack,
when everything happens
in quick but orderly
succession; which never
puts us in the painfully
embarrassing position of
having to cover up some
blunder of which, on the
contrary, we ought to be
taking advantage; which
keeps up an appearance of
taking by storm even that
which we are quite
prepared to surrender; and
adroitly flatters our two
favorite passions—the
pride of defense and the
pleasure of defeat.
—MARQUISE DE MERTEUIL IN
CHODERLOS DE LACLOS,
DANGEROUS LIAISONS,
TRANSLATED BY P.W.K. STONE
IN MICHEL FEHER, ED.,
THE LIBERTINE READER
What sensible man will
not intersperse his coaxing \
With kisses? Even if she
doesn't kiss back, \ Still
force on regardless! She
may struggle, cry
"Naughty!" \ Yet she
wants to be overcome. Just
Master the Art of the Bold Move • 409
desired as a woman, and on some level cannot help but enjoy his love for
her. Of course she struggles and resists, but that is only a sign that her emo-
tions are engaged. (Indifference is the single most effective deterrent to
seduction.) By taking his time, by making no bold moves even when he has
the opportunity for them, he instills in her a false sense of security and
proves himself by being patient. On what he pretends is his last visit to her,
however, he can sense she is ready—weak, confused, more afraid of losing
the addictive feeling of being desired than of suffering the consequences of
adultery. He deliberately makes her emotional, dramatically displays her let-
ters, creates some tension by playing a game of push-and-pull, and when
she takes his arm, he knows it is the time to strike. Now he moves quickly,
allowing her no time for doubts or second thoughts. But his move seems to
arise out of love, not lust. After so much resistance and tension, what a
pleasure to finally surrender. The climax now comes as a great release.
Never underestimate the role of vanity in love and seduction. If you
seem impatient, champing at the bit for sex, you signal that it is all about
libido, and that it has little to do with the target's own charms. That is
why you must defer the climax. A lengthier courtship will feed the target's
vanity, and will make the effect of your bold move all the more powerful
and enduring. Wait too long, though—showing desire, but then proving
too timid to make your move—and you will stir up a different kind of inse-
curity: "You found me desirable, but you are not acting on your desires;
maybe you're not so interested." Doubts like these affront your target's
vanity (if you're not interested, maybe I'm not so interesting), and are fatal
in the latter stages of seduction; awkwardness and misunderstandings will
spring up everywhere. Once you read in your targets' gestures that they are
ready and open—a look in the eye, mirroring behavior, a strange nervous-
ness in your presence—you must go on the offensive, make them feel that
their charms have unhinged you and pushed you into the bold move. They
will then have the ultimate pleasure: physical surrender and a psychological
boost to their vanity.
The more timidity a lover shows with us the more it con-
cerns our pride to goad him on; the more respect he has for
our resistance, the more respect we demand of him. We
would willingly say to you men: "Ah, in pity's name do
not suppose us to be so very virtuous; you are forcing us to
have too much of it."
—NINON DE L'ENCLOS
Keys to Seduction
Think of seduction as a world you enter, a world that is separate and
distinct from the real world. The rules are different here; what works
in daily life can have the opposite effect in seduction. The real world fea-take care \ Not to bruise
her tender lips with such
hard-snatched kisses, \
Don't give her a chance to
protest \ You're too rough.
Those who grab their
kisses, but not what
follows, \ Deserve to lose
all they've gained. How
short were you \ Of the
ultimate goal after all your
kissing? That was \
Gaucheness, not modesty,
I'm afraid . . .
—OVID, THE ART OF LOVE,
TRANSLATED BY PETER GREEN
I have tested all manner of
pleasures, and known every
variety of joy; and I have
found that neither intimacy
with princes, nor wealth
acquired, nor finding after
lacking, nor returning after
long absence, nor security
after fear and repose in a
safe refuge—none of these
things so powerfully affects
the soul as union with the
beloved, especially if it
come after long denial and
continual banishment. For
then the flame of passion
waxes exceeding hot, and
the furnace of yearning
blazes up, and the fire of
eager hope rages ever more
fiercely.
—IBN HAZM, THE RING OF
THE DOVE: A TREATISE ON THE
ART AND PRACTICE OF ARAB
LOVE, TRANSLATED BY A. J.
ARBERRY
I knew once two great
lords, brothers, both of
them highly bred and
highly accomplished
gentlemen which did love
two ladies, but the one of
these was of much higher
quality and more account
than the other in all
respects. Now being entered
both into the chamber of
