
Poetic Presence/Absence
In 1943, the Argentine military overthrew the government. A popular
forty-eight-year old colonel, Juan Perón, was named secretary of labor
and social affairs. Perón was a widow who had a fondness for young girls; at
the time of his appointment he was involved with a teenager whom he in-
troduced to one and all as his daughter.
One evening in January of 1944, Perón was seated among the other
military leaders in a Buenos Aires stadium, attending an artists' festival. It
was late and there were some empty seats around him; out of nowhere two
beautiful young actresses asked his permission to sit down. Were they jok-
ing? He would be delighted. He recognized one of the actresses—it was
Eva Duarte, a star of radio soap operas whose photograph was often on the
covers of the tabloids. The other actress was younger and prettier, but
Perón could not take his eyes off Eva, who was talking to another colonel.
She was really not his type at all. She was twenty-four, far too old for his
taste; she was dressed rather garishly; and there was something a little icy in
her manner. But she looked at him occasionally, and her glance excited
him. He looked away for a moment, and the next thing he knew she had
changed seats and was sitting next to him. They started to talk. She hung
on his every word. Yes, everything he said was precisely how she felt—the
poor, the workers, they were the future of Argentina. She had known
poverty herself. There were almost tears in her eyes when she said, at the
end of the conversation, "Thank you for existing."
In the next few days, Eva managed to get rid of Perón's "daughter" and
establish herself in his apartment. Everywhere he turned, there she was,
fixing him meals, caring for him when he was ill, advising him on politics.
Why did he let her stay? Usually he would have a fling with a superficial
young girl, then get rid of her when she seemed to be sticking around too
much. But there was nothing superficial about Eva. As time went by he
found himself getting addicted to the feeling she gave him. She was in-
tensely loyal, mirroring his every idea, puffing him up endlessly. He felt
more masculine in her presence, that was it, and more powerful—she be-
lieved he would make the country's ideal leader, and her belief affected
him. She was like the women in the tango ballads he loved so much—the
suffering women of the streets who became saintly mother figures and
looked after their men. Perón saw her every day, but he never felt he fully
knew her; one day her comments were a little obscene, the next she wasHe who does not know
how to encircle a girl so
that she loses sight of
everything he does not
want her to see, he who
does not know how to
poetize himself into a girl
so that it is from her that
everything proceeds as he
wants it—he is and
remains a bungler. . . .
To poetize oneself into a
girl is an art.
—SØREN KIERKEGAARD,
THE SEDUCER'S DIARY,
TRANSLATED BY HOWARD V.
HONG; AND EDNA H. HONG;
What else? If she's out,
reclining in her litter, \
Make your approach
discreet, \ And—just to fox
the sharp ears of those
around you— \ Cleverly
riddle each phrase \ With
ambiguous subtleties. If
she's taking a leisurely \
Stroll down the colonnade,
then you stroll there too—
\ Vary your pace to hers,
march ahead, drop behind
her, \ Dawdling and brisk
by turns. Be bold, \ Dodge
in round the columns
between you, brush your
person \ Lingeringly past
hers. You must never fail \
279
