Seductive Gravity
In the early 1840s, the center of attention in the French art world was a
young woman named Apollonie Sabatier. She was so much the natural
beauty that sculptors and painters vied to immortalize her in their works,
and she was also charming, easy to talk to, and seductively self-sufficient—
men were drawn to her. Her Paris apartment became a gathering spot for
writers and artists, and soon Madame Sabatier—as she came to be known,
although she was not married—was hosting one of the most important lit-
erary salons in France. Writers such as Gustave Flaubert, the elder Alexan-
dre Dumas, and Theophile Gautier were among her regular guests.
Near the end of 1852, when she was thirty, Madame Sabatier received
an anonymous letter. The writer confessed that he loved her deeply. Wor-
ried that she would find his sentiments ridiculous, he would not reveal his
name; yet he had to let her know that he adored her. Sabatier was used to
such attentions—one man after another had fallen in love with her—but
this letter was different: in this man she seemed to have inspired a quasi-
religious ardor. The letter, written in a disguised handwriting, contained a
poem dedicated to her; titled "To One Who Is Too Gay," it began by prais-
ing her beauty, yet ended with the lines
And so, one night, I'd like to sneak,
When darkness tolls the hour of pleasure,
A craven thief, toward the treasure
Which is your person, plump and sleek. . . .
And, most vertiginous delight!
Into those lips, so freshly striking
And daily lovelier to my liking—
Infuse the venom of my spite.
Mixed in with her admirer's adoration, clearly, was a strange kind of lust,
with a touch of cruelty to it. The poem both intrigued and disturbed
her—and she had no idea who had written it.
A few weeks later another letter arrived. As before, the writer en-
veloped Sabatier in cultlike worship, mixing the physical and the spiritual.
And as before, there was a poem, "All in One," in which he wrote,Omissions, denials,
deflections, deceptions,
diversions, and humility—
all aimed at provoking this
second state, the secret of
true seduction. Vulgar
seduction might proceed by
persistence, but true seduc-
tion proceeds by absence. .
. . It is like fencing: one
needs a field for the feint.
Throughout this period,
the seducer [Johannes], far
from seeking to close in on
her, seeks to maintain his
distance by various ploys:
he does not speak directly
to her but only to her aunt,
and then about trivial or
stupid subjects; he neutral-
izes everything by irony
and feigned pedanticism;
he fails to respond to any
feminine or erotic move-
ment, and even finds her a
sitcom suitor to disenchant
and deceive her, to the
point where she herself
takes the initiative and
breaks off her engagement,
thus completing the
seduction and creating the
ideal situation for her total
abandon.
—JEAN BAUDRILLARD,
SEDUCTION, TRANSLATED BY
BRIAN SINGER
385
386 • The Art of Seduction
No single beauty is the best,
Since she is all one flower divine
O mystic metamorphosis!
My senses into one sense flow—
Her voice makes perfume when she speaks,
Her breath is music faint and low!
Clearly the author was haunted by Sabatier's presence, and thought of her
constantly—but now she began to be haunted by him, thinking of him
night and day, and wondering who he was. His subsequent letters only
deepened the spell. It was flattering to hear that he was enchanted by more
than her beauty, yet also flattering to know that he was not immune to her
physical charms.
One day an idea occurred to Madame Sabatier as to who the writer
might be: a young poet who had frequented her salon for several years,
Charles Baudelaire. He seemed shy, in fact had hardly spoken to her, but
she had read some of his poetry, and although the poems in the letters were
more polished, the style was similar. At her apartment Baudelaire would al-
ways sit politely in a corner, but now that she thought of it, he would smile
at her strangely, nervously. It was the look of a young man in love. Now
when he visited she watched him carefully, and the more she watched, the
surer she was that he was the writer, but she never confirmed her intuition,
because she did not want to confront him—he might be shy, but he was a
man, and at some point he would have to come to her. And she felt certain
that he would. Then, suddenly the letters stopped coming—and Madame
Sabatier could not understand why, since the last one had been even more
adoring than all of the others before.
Several years went by, in which she often thought of her anonymous
admirer's letters, but they were never renewed. In 1857, however, Baude-
laire published a book of poetry, The Flowers of Evil, and Madame Sabatier
recognized several of the verses—they were the ones he had written for
her. Now they were out in the open for everyone to see. A little while later
the poet sent her a gift: a specially bound copy of the book, and a letter,
this time signed with his name. Yes, he wrote, he was the anonymous
writer—would she forgive him for being so mysterious in the past?
Furthermore, his feelings for her were as strong as ever: "You didn't think
for a moment that I could have forgotten you? . . . You to me are more
than a cherished image conjured up in dream, you're my superstition . . .
my constant companion, my secret! Farewell, dear Madame. I kiss your
hands with profound devotion."
This letter had a stronger effect on Madame Sabatier than the others
had. Perhaps it was his childlike sincerity, and the fact that he had finally
written to her directly; perhaps it was that he loved her but asked nothing
of her, unlike all the other men she knew who at some point had always
turned out to want something. Whatever it was, she had an uncontrollable
desire to see him. The next day she invited him to her apartment, alone.The rumor spread
everywhere. It was even
told to the queen
[Guinevere], who was
seated at dinner. She
nearly killed herself when
she heard the perfidious
rumor of Lancelot's death.
She thought it was true
and was so greatly
perturbed that she was
scarcely able to speak. . . .
She arose at once from the
table, and was able to give
vent to her grief without
being noticed or overheard.
She was so crazed with the
thought of killing herself
that she repeatedly grabbed
at her throat. Yet first she
confessed in conscience,
repented and asked God's
pardon; she accused herself
of having sinned against
the one she knew had
always been hers, and who
would still be, were he
alive. . . . She counted all
of the unkindnesses and
recalled each individual
unkindness; she noted
every one, and repeated
often: "Oh misery! What
was I thinking, when my
lover came before me and I
did not deign to welcome
him, nor even care to
listen! Was I not a fool to
refuse to speak or even look
at him? A fool? No, so
help me God, I was cruel
and deceitful! ... 7 believe
that it was I alone who
struck him that mortal
blow. When he came
happily before me expecting
me to receive him joyfully
and I shunned him and
would never even look at
him, was this not a mortal
blow? At that moment,
when I refused to speak, I
believe I severed both his
heart and his life. Those
two blows killed him, I
think, and not any hired
killers. • "Ah God! Will I
be forgiven this murder, this
sin? Never! All the rivers
