Use Spiritual Lures • 363
On the island they retraced the poetess's steps, imagining they were trans-
ported back into the pagan, innocent days of ancient Greece. For Renée,
Natalie had become Sappho herself. When they finally returned to Paris,
Renée wrote her, "My blond Siren, I don't want you to become like those
who dwell on earth. ... I want you to stay yourself, for this is the way you
cast your spell over me." Their affair lasted until Renée's death, in 1909.
Interpretation. Liane de Pougy and Renée Vivien both suffered a similar
oppression: they were self-absorbed, hyperaware of themselves. The source
of this habit in Liane was men's constant attention to her body. She could
never escape their looks, which plagued her with a feeling of heavi-
ness. Renée, meanwhile, thought too much about her own problems—
her repression of her lesbianism, her mortality. She felt consumed with
self-hatred.
Natalie Barney, on the other hand, was buoyant, lighthearted, absorbed
in the world around her. Her seductions—and by the end of her life they
numbered well into the hundreds—all had a similar quality: she took the
victim outside herself, directing her attention toward beauty, poetry, the in-
nocence of Sapphic love. She invited her women to participate in a kind of
cult in which they would worship these sublimities. To heighten the cult-
like feeling, she involved them in little rituals: they would call each other by
new names, send each other poems in daily telegrams, wear costumes,
make pilgrimages to holy sites. Two things would inevitably happen: the
women would start to direct some of the worshipful feelings they were ex-
periencing toward Natalie, who seemed as lofty and beautiful as the things
she held up to be adored; and, pleasantly diverted into this spiritualized
realm, they would also lose any heaviness they had felt about their bodies,
their selves, their identities. Their repression of their sexuality would melt
away. By the time Natalie kissed or caressed them, it would feel like some-
thing innocent, pure, as if they had returned to the Garden of Eden before
the fall.
Religion is the great balm of existence because it takes us outside our-
selves, connects us to something larger. As we contemplate the object of
worship (God, nature), our burdens are lifted away. It is wonderful to feel
raised up from the earth, to experience that kind of lightness. No matter
how progressive the times, many of us feel uncomfortable with our bodies,
our animal drives. A seducer who focuses too much attention on the
physical will stir up self-consciousness, and a residue of disgust. So focus
attention on something else. Invite the other person to worship some-
thing beautiful in the world. It could be nature, a work of art, even God
(or gods—paganism never goes out of fashion); people are dying to be-
lieve in something. Add some rituals. If you can make yourself seem to
resemble the thing you are worshiping—you are natural, aesthetic, noble,
and sublime—your targets will transfer their worship to you. Religion andwhere, catching sight of a
small hut in the distance,
she stumbled toward it,
and in the doorway she
found a holy man, who
was astonished to see her in
those parts and asked her
what she was doing there.
She told him that she had
been inspired by God, and
that she was trying, not
only to serve Him, but also
to find someone who could
teach her how she should
go about it. • On
observing how young and
exceedingly pretty she was,
the good man was afraid to
take her under his wing
lest the devil should catch
him unawares. So he
praised her for her good
intentions, and having
given her a quantity of
herb roots, wild apples, and
dates to eat, and some
water to drink, he said to
her: • "My daughter, not-
very far from here there is a
holy man who is much
more capable than I of
teaching you what you
want to know. Go along to
him." And he sent her
upon her way. • When she
came to this second man,
she was told precisely the
same thing, and so she
went on until she arrived
at the cell of a young
hermit, a very devout and
kindly fellow called
Rustico, to whom she put
the same inquiry as she
had addressed to the others.
Being anxious to prove to
himself that he possessed a
will of iron, he did not,
like the others, send her
away or direct her
elsewhere, but kept her
with him in his cell, in a
corner of which, when
night descended, he
prepared a makeshift bed
out of palm leaves, upon
which he invited her to lie
down and rest. • Once he
364 • The Art of Seduction
spirituality are full of sexual undertones that can be brought to the surface
once you have made your targets lose their self-awareness. From spiritual
ecstasy to sexual ecstasy is but one small step.
Come back to take me, quickly, and lead me far away. Pu-
rify me with a great fire of divine love, none of the animal
kind. You are all soul when you want to be, when you feel
it, take me far away from my body.
—LIANE DE POUGY
Keys to Seduction
Religion is the most seductive system that mankind has created. Death
is our greatest fear, and religion offers us the illusion that we are im-
mortal, that something about us will live on. The idea that we are an infini-
tesimal part of a vast and indifferent universe is terrifying; religion
humanizes this universe, makes us feel important and loved. We are not ani-
mals governed by uncontrollable drives, animals that die for no apparent
reason, but creatures made in the image of a supreme being. We too can be
sublime, rational, and good. Anything that feeds a desire or a wished-for il-
lusion is seductive, and nothing can match religion in this arena.
Pleasure is the bait that you use to lure a person into your web. But no
matter how clever a seducer you are, in the back of your targets' mind they
are aware of the endgame, the physical conclusion toward which you are
heading. You may think your target is unrepressed and hungry for pleasure,
but almost all of us are plagued by an underlying unease with our animal
nature. Unless you deal with this unease, your seduction, even when suc-
cessful in the short term, will be superficial and temporary. Instead, like
Natalie Barney, try to capture your target's soul, to build the foundation of
a deep and lasting seduction. Lure the victim deep into your web with
spirituality, making physical pleasure seem sublime and transcendent. Spiri-
tuality will disguise your manipulations, suggesting that your relationship is
timeless, and creating a space for ecstasy in the victim's mind. Remember
that seduction is a mental process, and nothing is more mentally intoxicat-
ing than religion, spirituality, and the occult.
In Gustave Flaubert's novel Madame Bovary, Rodolphe Boulanger visits
the country doctor Bovary and finds himself interested in the doctor's
beautiful wife, Emma. Boulanger was brutal and shrewd. He was some-
thing of a connoisseur: there had been many women in his life." He senses
that Emma is bored. A few weeks later he manages to run into her at a
county fair, where he gets her alone. He affects an air of sadness and
gloom: "Many's the time I've passed a cemetery in the moonlight and asked
myself if I wouldn't be better off lying there with the rest. ..." He men-
tions his bad reputation; he deserves it, he says, but is it his fault? "Do you
really not know that there exist souls that are ceaselessly in torment?" Sev-had taken this step, very
little time elapsed before
temptation went to war
against his willpower, and
after the first few assaults,
finding himself
outmaneuvered on all
fronts, he laid down his
arms and surrendered.
Casting aside pious
thoughts, prayers, and
penitential exercises, he
began to concentrate his
mental faculties upon the
youth and beauty of the
girl, and to devise suitable
ways and means for
approaching her in such a
fashion that she should not
think it lewd of him to
make the sort of proposal
he had in mind. By
putting certain questions to
her, he soon discovered that
she had never been
intimate with the opposite
sex and was every hit as
innocent as she seemed;
and he therefore thought of
a possible way to persuade
her, with the pretext of
serving God, to grant his
desires. He began by
delivering a long speech in
which he showed her how
powerful an enemy the
devil was to the Lord God,
and followed this up by
impressing upon her that of
all the ways of serving
God, the one that He most
appreciated consisted in
putting the devil back in
Hell, to which the
Almighty had consigned
him in the first place. •
The girl asked him how
this was done, and Rustico
replied: • "You will soon
find out, but just do
whatever you see me doing
for the present. "And so
saying, he began to divest
himself of the few clothes
he was wearing, leaving
himself completely naked.
The girl followed his
example, and he sank to
his knees as though he
