32 • The Art of Seduction
forced to return home and she had had to stay on alone for some while be-
fore she could join him. Now she was lonely, and had little money, and was
depressed by her squalid circumstances—after all, she had been raised as a
lady. She answered the ad.
The gentleman turned out to be Casanova, and what a gentleman he
was. The room he offered was nice, and the rent was low; he asked only for
occasional companionship. Miss Pauline moved in. They played chess, went
riding, discussed literature. He was so well-bred, polite, and generous. A se-
rious and high-minded girl, she came to depend on their friendship; here
was a man she could talk to for hours. Then one day Casanova seemed
changed, upset, excited: he confessed that he was in love with her. She was
going back to Portugal soon, to rejoin her lover, and this was not what she
wanted to hear. She told him he should go riding to calm down.
Later that evening she received news: he had fallen from his horse. Feel-
ing responsible for his accident, she rushed to him, found him in bed, and
fell into his arms, unable to control herself. The two became lovers that
night, and remained so for the rest of Miss Pauline's stay in London. Yet
when it came time for her to leave for Portugal, he did not try to stop her;
instead, he comforted her, reasoning that each of them had offered the
other the perfect, temporary antidote to their loneliness, and that they
would be friends for life.
Some years later, in a small Spanish town, a young and beautiful girl
named Ignazia was leaving church after confession. She was approached by
Casanova. Walking her home, he explained that he had a passion for danc-
ing the fandango, and invited her to a ball the following evening. He was so
different from anyone in the town, which bored her so—she desperately
wanted to go. Her parents were against the arrangement, but she persuaded
her mother to act as a chaperone. After an unforgettable evening of danc-
ing (and he danced the fandango remarkably well for a foreigner), Casa-
nova confessed that he was madly in love with her. She replied (very sadly,
though) that she already had a fiancé. Casanova did not force the issue, but
over the next few days he took Ignazia to more dances and to the bullfights.
On one of these occasions he introduced her to a friend of his, a duchess,
who flirted with him brazenly; Ignazia was terribly jealous. By now she was
desperately in love with Casanova, but her sense of duty and religion for-
bade such thoughts.
Finally, after days of torment, Ignazia sought out Casanova and took his
hand: "My confessor tried to make me promise to never be alone with you
again," she said, "and as I could not, he refused to give me absolution. It is
the first time in my life such a thing has happened to me. I have put myself
in God's hands. I have made up my mind, so long as you are here, to do all
you wish. When to my sorrow you leave Spain, I shall find another confes-
sor. My fancy for you is, after all, only a passing madness."
Casanova was perhaps the most successful seducer in history; few women
could resist him. His method was simple: on meeting a woman, he wouldhis sash. • Presently he
raises the lattice, and the
two lovers stand together by
the side door while he tells
her how he dreads the
coining day, which will
keep them apart; then he
slips away. The lady
watches him go, and this
moment of parting will
remain among her most
charming memories. •
Indeed, one's attachment to
a man depends largely on
the elegance of his leave-
taking. When he jumps
out of bed, scurries about
the room, tightly fastens
his trouser sash, rolls up
the sleeves of his court
cloak, overrobe, or hunting
costume, stuffs his
belongings into the breast
of his robe and then briskly
secures the outer sash—one
really begins to hate him.
—THE PILLOW BOOK OF SEI
SHONAGON, TRANSLATED AND
EDITED BY IVAN MORRIS
The Ideal Lover • 33
study her, go along with her moods, find out what was missing in her life,
and provide it. He made himself the Ideal Lover. The bored burgomaster's
wife needed adventure and romance; she wanted someone who would sac-
rifice time and comfort to have her. For Miss Pauline what was missing was
friendship, lofty ideals, serious conversation; she wanted a man of breeding
and generosity who would treat her like a lady. For Ignazia, what was miss-
ing was suffering and torment. Her life was too easy; to feel truly alive, and
to have something real to confess, she needed to sin. In each case Casanova
adapted himself to the woman's ideals, brought her fantasy to life. Once she
had fallen under his spell, a little ruse or calculation would seal the romance
(a day among rats, a contrived fall from a horse, an encounter with another
woman to make Ignazia jealous).
The Ideal Lover is rare in the modern world, for the role takes effort.
You will have to focus intensely on the other person, fathom what she is
missing, what he is disappointed by. People will often reveal this in subtle
ways: through gesture, tone of voice, a look in the eye. By seeming to be
what they lack, you will fit their ideal.
To create this effect requires patience and attention to detail. Most
people are so wrapped up in their own desires, so impatient, they are inca-
pable of the Ideal Lover role. Let that be a source of infinite opportunity.
Be an oasis in the desert of the self-absorbed; few can resist the temptation
of following a person who seems so attuned to their desires, to bringing to
life their fantasies. And as with Casanova, your reputation as one who
gives such pleasure will precede you and make your seductions that much
The cultivation of the pleasures of the senses was ever my
principal aim in life. Knowing that I was personally calcu-
lated to please the fair sex, I always strove to make myself
agreeable to it.
—CASANOVA
The Beauty Ideal
In 1730, when Jeanne Poisson was a mere nine years old, a fortune-teller
predicted that one day she would be the mistress of Louis XV. The pre-
diction was quite ridiculous, since Jeanne came from the middle class, and
it was a tradition stretching back for centuries that the king's mistress be
chosen from among the nobility. To make matters worse, Jeanne's father
was a notorious rake, and her mother had been a courtesan.
Fortunately for Jeanne, one of her mother's lovers was a man of great
wealth who took a liking to the pretty girl and paid for her education.
Jeanne learned to sing, to play the clavichord, to ride with uncommon skill,
to act and dance; she was schooled in literature and history as if she were a
boy. The playwright Crébillon instructed her in the art of conversation.During the early 1970s,
against a turbulent political
backdrop that included the
fiasco of American
involvement in the
Vietnam War and the
downfall of President
Richard Nixon's
presidency in the Watergate
scandal, a "me generation"
sprang to prominence—and
[Andy] Warhol was there
to hold up its mirror.
Unlike the radicalized
protesters of the 1960s
who wanted to change all
the ills of society, the self-
absorbed "me" people
sought to improve their
bodies and to "get in
touch" with their own
feelings. They cared
passionately about their
appearance, health, life-
style, and bank accounts.
Andy catered to their self-
centeredness and inflated
pride by offering his
services as a portraitist. By
the end of the decade, he
would be internationally
recognized as one of the
leading portraitists of his
era. . . . • Warhol offered
his clients an irresistible
product: a stylish and
flattering portrait by a
famous artist who was
himself a certified celebrity.
Conferring an alluring star
presence upon even the
most celebrated of faces, he
transformed his subjects
into glamorous apparitions,
presenting their faces as he
thought they wanted to be
seen and remembered. By
filtering his sitters' good
features through his
silkscreens and
exaggerating their vivacity,
he enabled them to gain
entree to a more mythic
and rarefied level of
existence. The possession
of great wealth and power
might do for everyday life,
but the commissioning of a
portrait by Warhol was a
