
Insinuating Desire
One evening in the 1770s, a young man went to the Paris Opera to
meet his lover, the Countess de . The couple had been fighting,
and he was anxious to see her again. The countess had not arrived yet at
her box, but from an adjacent one a friend of hers, Madame de T ,
called out to the young man to join her, remarking that it was an excellent
stroke of luck that they had met that evening—he must keep her company
on a trip she had to take. The young man wanted urgently to see the
countess, but Madame was charming and insistent and he agreed to go with
her. Before he could ask why or where, she quickly escorted him to her
carriage outside, which then sped off.
Now the young man enjoined his hostess to tell him where she was
taking him. At first she just laughed, but finally she told him: to her hus-
band's château. The couple had been estranged, but had decided to recon-
cile; her husband was a bore, however, and she felt a charming young man
like himself would liven things up. The young man was intrigued: Madame
was an older woman, with a reputation for being rather formal, though he
also knew she had a lover, a marquis. Why had she chosen him for this ex-
cursion? Her story was not quite credible. Then, as they traveled, she sug-
gested he look out the window at the passing landscape, as she was doing.
He had to lean over toward her to do so, and just as he did, the carriage
jolted. She grabbed his hand and fell into his arms. She stayed there for a
moment, then pulled away from him rather abruptly. After an awkward si-
lence, she said, "Do you intend to convince me of my imprudence in your
regard?" He protested that the incident had been an accident and reassured
her he would behave himself. In truth, however, having her in his arms had
made him think otherwise.
They arrived at the château. The husband came to meet them, and the
young man expressed his admiration of the building: "What you see is
nothing," Madame interrupted, "I must take you to Monsieur's apartment."
Before he could ask what she meant, the subject was quickly changed. The
husband was indeed a bore, but he excused himself after supper. Now
Madame and the young man were alone. She invited him to walk with her
in the gardens; it was a splendid evening, and as they walked, she slipped
her arm in his. She was not worried that he would take advantage of her,
she said, because she knew how attached he was to her good friend the
countess. They talked of other things, and then she returned to the topic ofAs we were about to enter
the chamber, she stopped
me. "Remember," she said
gravely, "you are supposed
never to have seen, never
even suspected, the
sanctuary you're about to
enter. . . ." • . . . All this
was like an initiation rite.
She led me by the hand
across a small, dark
corridor. My heart was
pounding as though I were
a young proselyte being put
to the test before the
celebration oj the great
mysteries. . . . • "But
your Countess ..." she
said, stopping. I was about
to reply when the doors
opened; my answer was
interrupted by admiration.
I was astonished,
delighted, I no longer
know what became of me,
and I began in good faith
to believe in magic. . . . In
truth, I found myself in a
vast cage of mirrors on
which images were so
artistically painted that
they produced the illusion
of all the objects they
represented.
—VIVANT DENON,"NO
TOMORROW," IN MICHEL FEHER,
ED., THE LIBERTINE READER
213
