Beware the Aftereffects • 427
could head for America, start all over, but instead he was just crazy enough
to land at Cannes. What was he thinking? A thousand men against all the
armies of France? He set off toward Grenoble with his ragtag army. One at
least had to admire his courage, his insatiable love of glory and of France.
Then, too, the French peasantry were spellbound at the sight of their
former emperor. This man, after all, had redistributed a great deal of land
to them, which the new king was trying to take back. They swooned at the
sight of his famous eagle standards, revivals of symbols from the revolution.
They left their fields and joined his march. Outside Grenoble, the first of
the troops that the king sent to stop Napoleon caught up with him.
Napoleon dismounted and walked on foot toward them. "Soldiers of the
Fifth Army Corps!" he cried out. "Don't you know me? If there is one
among you who wishes to kill his emperor, let him come forward and do
so. Here I am!" He threw open his gray cloak, inviting them to take aim.
There was a moment of silence, and then, from all sides, cries rang out of
"Vive l'Empereur!" In one stroke, Napoleon's army had doubled in size.
The march continued. More soldiers, remembering the glory he had
given them, changed sides. The city of Lyons fell without a battle. Generals
with larger armies were dispatched to stop him, but the sight of Napoleon
at the head of his troops was an overwhelmingly emotional experience for
them, and they switched allegiance. King Louis fled France, abdicating in
the process. On March 20, Napoleon reentered Paris and returned to the
palace he had left only thirteen months before—all without having had to
fire a single shot.
The peasantry and the soldiers had embraced Napoleon, but Parisians
were less enthusiastic, particularly those who had served in his government.
They feared the storms he would bring. Napoleon ruled the country for
one hundred days, until the allies and his enemies from within defeated
him. This time he was shipped off to the remote island of St. Helena,
where he was to die.
Interpretation. Napoleon always thought of France, and his army, as a tar-
get to be wooed and seduced. As General de Ségur wrote of Napoleon: "In
moments of sublime power, he no longer commands like a man, but se-
duces like a woman." In the case of his escape from Elba, he planned a
bold, surprising gesture that would titillate a bored nation. He began his re-
turn to France among the people who would be most receptive to him: the
peasantry who had revered him. He revived the symbols—the revolution-
ary colors, the eagle standards—that would stir up the old sentiments. He
placed himself at the head of his army, daring his former soldiers to fire on
him. The march on Paris that brought him back to power was pure theater,
calculated for emotional effect every step of the way. What a contrast this
former amour presented to the dolt of a king who now ruled them.
Napoleon's second seduction of France was not a classical seduction,
following the usual steps, but a re-seduction. It was built on old emotions
428 • The Art of Seduction
and revived an old love. Once you have seduced a person (or a nation)
there is almost always a lull, a slight letdown, which sometimes leads to a
separation; it is surprisingly easy, though, to re-seduce the same target. The
old feelings never go away, they lie dormant, and in a flash you can take
your target by surprise.
It is a rare pleasure to be able to relive the past, and one's youth—to feel
the old emotions. Like Napoleon, add a dramatic flair to your re-seduction:
revive the old images, the symbols, the expressions that will stir memory.
Like the French, your targets will tend to forget the ugliness of the separa-
tion and will remember only the good things. You should make this second
seduction bold and quick, giving your targets no time to reflect or wonder.
Like Napoleon, play on the contrast to their current lover, making his or
her behavior seem timid and stodgy by comparison.
Not everyone will be receptive to a re-seduction, and some moments
will be inappropriate. When Napoleon came back from Elba, the Parisians
were too sophisticated for him, and could see right through him. Unlike
the peasants of the South, they already knew him well; and his reentry
came too soon, they were too worn out by him. If you want to re-seduce
someone, choose one who does not know you so well, whose memories of
you are cleaner, who is less suspicious by nature, and who is dissatisfied
with present circumstances. Also, you might want to let some time pass.
Time will restore your luster and make your faults fade away. Never see a
separation or sacrifice as final. With a little drama and planning, a victim
can be retaken in no time.
Symbol: Em-
bers, the remains of the fire on the
morning after. Left to themselves, the embers will
slowly die out. Do not leave the fire to chance and to the
elements. To put it out, douse it, suffocate it, give it nothing to
feed on. To bring it back to life, fan it, stoke it, until it blazes
anew. Only your constant attention and vigilance will keep it burning.
