Poeticize Your Presence • 281
life. Her language was florid and theatrical; she surrounded him with atten-
tion, indeed to the point of suffocation, but a woman's dutiful service to a
great man was a classic image, and was celebrated in innumerable tango bal-
lads. Yet she managed to remain elusive, mysterious, like a movie star you
see all the time on the screen but never really know. And when Perón was
finally alone, in prison, these poetic images and associations burst forth in
his mind. He idealized her madly; as far as he was concerned, she was no
longer an actress with a tawdry past. She seduced an entire nation the same
way. The secret was her dramatic poetic presence, combined with a touch
of elusive distance; over time, you would see whatever you wanted to in
her. To this day people fantasize about what Eva was really like.
Familiarity destroys seduction. This rarely happens early on; there is so
much to learn about a new person. But a midpoint may arrive when the
target has begun to idealize and fantasize about you, only to discover that
you are not what he or she thought. It is not a question of being seen too
often, of being too available, as some imagine. In fact, if your targets see
you too rarely, you give them nothing to feed on, and their attention may
be caught by someone else; you have to occupy their mind. It is more a
matter of being too consistent, too obvious, too human and real. Your tar-
gets cannot idealize you if they know too much about you, if they start to
see you as all too human. Not only must you maintain a degree of distance,
but there must be something fantastical and bewitching about you, sparking
all kinds of delightful possibilities in their mind. The possibility Eva held
out was the possibility that she was what in Argentine culture was consid-
ered the ideal woman—devoted, motherly, saintly—but there are any num-
ber of poetic ideals you can try to embody. Chivalry, adventure, romance,
and so on, are just as potent, and if you have a whiff of them about you,
you can breathe enough poetry into the air to fill people's minds with fan-
tasies and dreams. At all costs, you must embody something, even if it is
roguery and evil. Anything to avoid the taint of familiarity and commonness.
What I need is a woman who is something, anything; ei-
ther very beautiful or very kind or in the last resort very
wicked; very witty or very stupid, but something.
—ALFRED DE MUSSET
Keys to Seduction
We all have a self-image that is more flattering than the truth: we
think of ourselves as more generous, selfless, honest, kindly, intelli-
gent, or good-looking than in fact we are. It is extremely difficult for us to
be honest with ourselves about our own limitations; we have a desperate
need to idealize ourselves. As the writer Angela Carter remarks, we would
rather align ourselves with angels than with the higher primates from
which we are actually descended.would be to kiss her, to
be kissed by her," and so
on. . . . • 3. Hope. You
observe her perfections, and
it is at this moment that a
woman really ought to
surrender, for the utmost
physical pleasure. Even the
most reserved women blush
to the whites of their eyes
at this moment of hope.
The passion is so strong,
and the pleasure so sharp,
that they betray themselves
unmistakably. • 4. Love is
born. To love is to enjoy
seeing, touching, and
sensing with all the senses,
as closely as possible, a
lovable object which loves
in return. • 5. The first
crystallization begins. If
you are sure that a woman
loves you, it is a pleasure
to endow her with a
thousand perfections and to
count your blessings with
infinite satisfaction. In the
end you overrate wildly,
and regard her as
something fallen from
Heaven, unknown as yet,
but certain to be yours. •
Leave a lover with his
thoughts for twenty four
hours, and this is what will
happen: • At the salt
mines of Salzburg, they
throw a leafless wintry
bough into one of the
abandoned workings. Two
or three months later they
haul it out covered with a
shining deposit of crystals.
The smallest twig, no
bigger than a torn-tit's claw,
is studded with a galaxy of
scintillating diamonds. The
original branch is no longer
recognizable. • What I
have called crystallization
is a mental process which
draws from everything that
happens new proofs of the
perfection of the loved
one. . . . • A man in love
sees every perfection in the
object of his love, but his
attention is liable to
282 • The Art of Seduction
This need to idealize extends to our romantic entanglements, because
when we fall in love, or under the spell of another person, we see a reflec-
tion of ourselves. The choice we make in deciding to become involved
with another person reveals something important and intimate about us: we
resist seeing ourselves as having fallen for someone who is cheap or tacky or
tasteless, because it reflects badly on who we are. Furthermore, we are often
likely to fall for someone who resembles us in some way. Should that per-
son be deficient, or worst of all ordinary, then there is something deficient
and ordinary about us. No, at all costs the loved one must be overvalued
and idealized, at least for the sake of our own self-esteem. Besides, in a
world that is harsh and full of disappointment, it is a great pleasure to be
able to fantasize about a person you are involved with.
This makes the seducer's task easy: people are dying to be given the
chance to fantasize about you. Do not spoil this golden opportunity by
overexposing yourself, or becoming so familiar and banal that the target
sees you exactly as you are. You do not have to be an angel, or a paragon of
virtue—that would be quite boring. You can be dangerous, naughty, even
somewhat vulgar, depending on the tastes of your victim. But never be or-
dinary or limited. In poetry (as opposed to reality), anything is possible.
Soon after we fall under a person's spell, we form an image in our
minds of who they are and what pleasures they might offer. Thinking of
them when we are alone, we tend to make this image more and more ide-
alized. The novelist Stendhal, in his book On Love, calls this phenomenon
"crystallization," telling the story of how, in Salzburg, Austria, they used to
throw a leafless branch into the abandoned depths of a salt mine in the
middle of winter. When the branch was pulled out months later, it would
be covered with spectacular crystals. That is what happens to a loved one in
our minds.
According to Stendhal, though, there are two crystallizations. The first
happens when we first meet the person. The second and more important
one happens later, when a bit of doubt creeps in—you desire the other per-
son, but they elude you, you are not sure they are yours. This bit of doubt
is critical—it makes your imagination work double, deepens the poeticizing
process. In the seventeenth century, the great rake the Duc de Lauzun
pulled off one of the most spectacular seductions in history—that of the
Grande Mademoiselle, the cousin of King Louis XIV, and the wealthiest
and most powerful woman in France. He tickled her imagination with a
few brief encounters at the court, letting her catch glimpses of his wit, his
audacity, his cool manner. She would begin to think of him when she was
alone. Next she started to bump into him more often at court, and they
would have little conversations or walks. When these meetings were over,
she would be left with a doubt: is he or is he not interested in me? This
made her want to see him more, in order to allay her doubts. She began to
idealize him all out of proportion to the reality, for the duke was an incor-
rigible scoundrel.
Remember: if you are easily had, you cannot be worth that much. It iswander after a time because
one gets tired of anything
uniform, even perfect
happiness. • This is what
happens next to fix the
attention: • 6. Doubt
creeps in. . . . He is met
with indifference, coldness,
or even anger if he appears
too confident. . . . The
lover begins to be less sure
of the good fortune he was
anticipating and subjects
his grounds for hope to a
critical examination. • He
tries to recoup by indulging
in other pleasures but finds
them inane. He is seized
by the dread of a frightful
calamity and now
concentrates fully. Thus
begins: • 7. The second
crystallization, which
deposits diamond layers of
proof that "she loves me."
• Every few minutes
throughout the night which
follows the birth of doubt,
the lover has a moment of
dreadful misgiving, and
then reassures himself "she
loves me"; and
crystallization begins to
reveal new charms. Then
once again the haggard eye
of doubt pierces him and he
stops transfixed. He forgets
to draw breath and mutters,
"But does she love me?"
Torn between doubt and
delight, the poor lover
convinces himself that she
could give him such
pleasure as he could find
nowhere else on earth.
—STENDHAL, LOVE,
TRANSLATED BY GILBERT AND
SUZANNE SALE
Falling in love
automatically tends toward
madness. Left to itself, it
goes to utter extremes. This
is well known by the
"conquistadors" of both
sexes. Once a woman's
