
Fantasy in the Flesh
In 1964, a twenty-year-old Frenchman named Bernard Bouriscout ar-
rived in Beijing, China, to work as an accountant in the French embassy.
His first weeks there were not what he had expected. Bouriscout had
grown up in the French provinces, dreaming of travel and adventure.
When he had been assigned to come to China, images of the Forbidden
City, and of the gambling dens of Macao, had danced in his mind. But this
was Communist China, and contact between Westerners and Chinese was
almost impossible at the time. Bouriscout had to socialize with the other
Europeans stationed in the city, and what a boring and cliquish lot they
were. He grew lonely, regretted taking the assignment, and began making
plans to leave.
Then, at a Christmas party that year, Bouriscout's eyes were drawn to a
young Chinese man in a corner of the room. He had never seen anyone
Chinese at any of these affairs. The man was intriguing: he was slender and
short, a bit reserved, but he had an attractive presence. Bouriscout went up
and introduced himself. The man, Shi Pei Pu, proved to be a writer of
Chinese-opera librettos who also taught Chinese to members of the
French embassy. Aged twenty-six, he spoke perfect French. Everything
about him fascinated Bouriscout; his voice was like music, soft and whis-
pery, and he left you wanting to know more about him. Bouriscout, al-
though usually shy, insisted on exchanging telephone numbers. Perhaps Pei
Pu could be his Chinese tutor.
They met a few days later in a restaurant. Bouriscout was the only
Westerner there—at last a taste of something real and exotic. Pei Pu, it
turned out, had been a well-known actor in Chinese operas and came from
a family with connections to the former ruling dynasty. Now he wrote
operas about the workers, but he said this with a look of irony They began
to meet regularly, Pei Pu showing Bouriscout the sights of Beijing. Bouris-
cout loved his stories—Pei Pu talked slowly, and every historical detail
seemed to come alive as he spoke, his hands moving to embellish his words.
This, he might say, is where the last Ming emperor hung himself, pointing
to the spot and telling the story at the same time. Or, the cook in the
restaurant we just ate in once served in the palace of the last emperor, and
then another magnificent tale would follow. Pei Pu also talked of life in the
Beijing Opera, where men often played women's parts, and sometimes be-
came famous for it.Lovers and madmen have
such seething brains, \ Such
shaping fantasies, that
apprehend \ More than cool
reason ever comprehends.
—WILLIAM SHAKESPEARE,
A MIDSUMMER NIGHT'S
DREAM
He was not a sex person.
He was like . . . somebody
who had come down from
the clouds. He was not
human. You could not say
he was a man friend or a
woman friend; he was
somebody different
anyway. . . . You feel he
was only a friend who was
coming from another planet
and so nice also, so
overwhelming and
separated from the life of
the ground.
—BERNARD BOURISCOUT, IN
JOYCE WADLER, LIAISON
Romance had again come
her way personified by a
handsome young German
officer, Lieutenant Konrad
Friedrich, who called upon
her at Neuilly to ask her
help. He wanted Pauline
[Bonaparte] to use her
291
