378 • The Art of Seduction
with you. They need to feel fear and anxiety. Show them some coldness, a
flash of anger they did not expect. Be irrational if necessary. There is always
the trump card: a breakup. Let them feel they have lost you forever, make
them fear that they have lost the power to charm you. Let these feelings sit
with them for a while, then pull them back from the precipice. The recon-
ciliation will be intense.
In 33 B.C., Mark Antony heard a rumor that Cleopatra, his lover of
several years, had decided to seduce his rival, Octavius, and that she was
planning to poison Antony. Cleopatra had poisoned people before; in fact
she was an expert in the art. Antony grew paranoid, and finally one day
confronted her. Cleopatra did not protest her innocence. Yes, that was true,
it was quite within her power to poison Antony at any moment; there were
no precautions he could take. Only the love she felt for him could protect
him. To demonstrate, she took some flowers and dropped them into his
wine. Antony hesitated, then raised the cup to his lips; Cleopatra grabbed
his arm and stopped him. She had a prisoner brought in to drink the wine,
and the prisoner promptly dropped dead. Falling at Cleopatra's feet,
Antony professed that he loved her now more than ever. He did not speak
out of cowardice; there was no man braver than he, and if Cleopatra could
have poisoned him, he for his part could have left her and gone back to
Rome. No, what pushed him over the edge was the feeling that she had
control over his emotions, over life and death. He was her slave. Her
demonstration of her power over him was not only effective but erotic.
Like Antony, many of us have masochistic yearnings without realizing
it. It takes someone to inflict some pain on us for these deeply repressed de-
sires to come to the surface. You must learn to recognize the types of hid-
den masochists out there, for each one enjoys a particular kind of pain. For
instance, there are people who feel that they deserve nothing good in life,
and who, unable to deal with success, sabotage themselves constantly. Be
nice to them, admit that you admire them, and they are uncomfortable,
since they feel that they cannot possibly match up to the ideal figure you
have clearly imagined them to be. Such self-saboteurs do better with a little
punishment; scold them, make them aware of their inadequacies. They feel
they deserve such criticism and when it comes it is with a sense of relief. It
is also easy to make them feel guilty, a feeling that deep down they enjoy.
Other people experience the responsibilities and duties of modern life
as such a heavy burden, they long to give it all up. These people are often
looking for someone or something to worship—a cause, a religion, a guru.
Make them worship you. And then there are those who want to play the
martyr. Recognize them by the joy they take in complaining, in feeling
righteous and wronged; then give them a reason to complain. Remember:
appearances deceive. Often the strongest-looking people—the Kissingers
and Don Mateos—may secretly want to be punished. In any event, follow
up pain with pleasure and you will create a state of dependency that will
last for a long time.
Mix Pleasure with Pain • 379
Symbol: The Precipice. At the edge of a cliff, people often feel
lightheaded, both fearful and dizzy. For a moment they
can imagine themselves falling headlong. At the
same time, a part of them is tempted. Lead
your targets as close to the edge as
possible, then pull them
back. No thrill
without
fear.
Reversal
People who have recently experienced a lot of pain or a loss will flee if
you try to inflict more on them. They have enough in their lives al-
ready. Far better to surround these types with pleasure—that will put them
under your spell. The technique of inflicting pain works best on those who
have it easy, who have power and few problems. People with comfortable
lives may also feel a gnawing sense of guilt, as if they had gotten away with
something. They may not consciously know it, but secretly they long for
some punishment, a good mental thrashing, something that will bring
them back down to earth.
Also, remember to not use the pleasure-through-pain tactic too early
on. Some of the greatest seducers in history—Byron, Jiang Qing (Madame
Mao), Picasso—had a sadistic streak, an ability to inflict mental torture. If
their victims had known in advance what they were getting themselves
into, they would have run for the hills. In truth, most of these seducers
lured their targets into their webs by appearing to be paragons of sweetness
and affection. Even Byron seemed like an angel when he first met a
woman, so that she tended to doubt his devilish reputation—a seductive
doubt, for it allowed her to think of herself as the only one who really
understood him. His cruelty would come out later on, but by then it would
be too late. The victim's emotions were engaged, and his harshness would
only intensify her feelings.
In the beginning, then, wear the mask of a lamb, making pleasure and
attentiveness your bait. First get under their skin, then lead them on a wild
ride.
