364 • The Art of Seduction
spirituality are full of sexual undertones that can be brought to the surface
once you have made your targets lose their self-awareness. From spiritual
ecstasy to sexual ecstasy is but one small step.
Come back to take me, quickly, and lead me far away. Pu-
rify me with a great fire of divine love, none of the animal
kind. You are all soul when you want to be, when you feel
it, take me far away from my body.
—LIANE DE POUGY
Keys to Seduction
Religion is the most seductive system that mankind has created. Death
is our greatest fear, and religion offers us the illusion that we are im-
mortal, that something about us will live on. The idea that we are an infini-
tesimal part of a vast and indifferent universe is terrifying; religion
humanizes this universe, makes us feel important and loved. We are not ani-
mals governed by uncontrollable drives, animals that die for no apparent
reason, but creatures made in the image of a supreme being. We too can be
sublime, rational, and good. Anything that feeds a desire or a wished-for il-
lusion is seductive, and nothing can match religion in this arena.
Pleasure is the bait that you use to lure a person into your web. But no
matter how clever a seducer you are, in the back of your targets' mind they
are aware of the endgame, the physical conclusion toward which you are
heading. You may think your target is unrepressed and hungry for pleasure,
but almost all of us are plagued by an underlying unease with our animal
nature. Unless you deal with this unease, your seduction, even when suc-
cessful in the short term, will be superficial and temporary. Instead, like
Natalie Barney, try to capture your target's soul, to build the foundation of
a deep and lasting seduction. Lure the victim deep into your web with
spirituality, making physical pleasure seem sublime and transcendent. Spiri-
tuality will disguise your manipulations, suggesting that your relationship is
timeless, and creating a space for ecstasy in the victim's mind. Remember
that seduction is a mental process, and nothing is more mentally intoxicat-
ing than religion, spirituality, and the occult.
In Gustave Flaubert's novel Madame Bovary, Rodolphe Boulanger visits
the country doctor Bovary and finds himself interested in the doctor's
beautiful wife, Emma. Boulanger was brutal and shrewd. He was some-
thing of a connoisseur: there had been many women in his life." He senses
that Emma is bored. A few weeks later he manages to run into her at a
county fair, where he gets her alone. He affects an air of sadness and
gloom: "Many's the time I've passed a cemetery in the moonlight and asked
myself if I wouldn't be better off lying there with the rest. ..." He men-
tions his bad reputation; he deserves it, he says, but is it his fault? "Do you
really not know that there exist souls that are ceaselessly in torment?" Sev-had taken this step, very
little time elapsed before
temptation went to war
against his willpower, and
after the first few assaults,
finding himself
outmaneuvered on all
fronts, he laid down his
arms and surrendered.
Casting aside pious
thoughts, prayers, and
penitential exercises, he
began to concentrate his
mental faculties upon the
youth and beauty of the
girl, and to devise suitable
ways and means for
approaching her in such a
fashion that she should not
think it lewd of him to
make the sort of proposal
he had in mind. By
putting certain questions to
her, he soon discovered that
she had never been
intimate with the opposite
sex and was every hit as
innocent as she seemed;
and he therefore thought of
a possible way to persuade
her, with the pretext of
serving God, to grant his
desires. He began by
delivering a long speech in
which he showed her how
powerful an enemy the
devil was to the Lord God,
and followed this up by
impressing upon her that of
all the ways of serving
God, the one that He most
appreciated consisted in
putting the devil back in
Hell, to which the
Almighty had consigned
him in the first place. •
The girl asked him how
this was done, and Rustico
replied: • "You will soon
find out, but just do
whatever you see me doing
for the present. "And so
saying, he began to divest
himself of the few clothes
he was wearing, leaving
himself completely naked.
The girl followed his
example, and he sank to
his knees as though he
Use Spiritual Lures • 365
eral times he takes Emma's hand, but she politely withdraws it. He talks of
love, the magnetic force that draws two people together. Perhaps it has
roots in some earlier existence, some previous incarnation of their souls.
"Take us, for example. Why should we have met? How did it happen? It
can only be that something in our particular inclinations made us come
closer and closer across the distance that separated us, the way two rivers
flow together." He takes her hand again and this time she lets him hold it.
After the fair, he avoids her for a few weeks, then suddenly shows up,
claiming that he tried to stay away but that fate, destiny, has pulled him
back. He takes Emma riding. When he finally makes his move, in the
woods, she seems frightened and rejects his advances. "You must have some
mistaken idea," he protests. "I have you in my heart like a Madonna on a
pedestal. ... I beseech you: be my friend, my sister, my angel!" Under the
spell of his words, she lets him hold her and lead her deeper into the
woods, where she succumbs.
Rodolphe's strategy is threefold. First he talks of sadness, melancholy,
discontent, talk that makes him seem nobler than other people, as if life's
common material pursuits could not satisfy him. Next he talks of destiny,
the magnetic attraction of two souls. This makes his interest in Emma seem
not so much a momentary impulse as something timeless, linked to the
movement of the stars. Finally he talks of angels, the elevated and the sub-
lime. By placing everything on the spiritual plane, he distracts Emma from
the physical, makes her feel giddy, and packs a seduction that could have
taken months into a matter of a few encounters.
The references Rodolphe uses might seem cliched by today's standards,
but the strategy itself will never grow old. Simply adapt it to the occult fads
of the day. Affect a spiritual air by displaying a discontent with the banali-
ties of life. It is not money or sex or success that moves you; your drives are
never so base. No, something much deeper motivates you. Whatever this is,
keep it vague, letting the target imagine your hidden depths. The stars, as-
trology, fate, are always appealing; create the sense that destiny has brought
you and your target together. That will make your seduction feel more
natural. In a world where too much is controlled and manufactured, the
sense that fate, necessity, or some higher power is guiding your relationship
is doubly seductive. If you want to weave religious motifs into your seduc-
tion, it is always best to choose some distant, exotic religion with a slightly
pagan air. It is easy to move from pagan spirituality to pagan earthiness.
Timing counts: once you have stirred your targets' souls, move quickly to
the physical, making sexuality seem merely an extension of the spiritual vi-
brations you are experiencing. In other words, employ the spiritual strategy
as close to the time for your bold move as possible.
The spiritual is not exclusively the religious or the occult. It is anything
that will add a sublime, timeless quality to your seduction. In the modern
world, culture and art have in some ways taken the place of religion. There
are two ways to use art in your seduction: first, create it yourself, in the tar-
get's honor. Natalie Barney wrote poems, and barraged her targets withwere about to pray, getting
her to kneel directly
opposite. • In this posture,
the girl's beauty was
displayed to Rustico in all
its glory, and his longings
blazed more fiercely than
ever, bringing about the
res u rrectio n of the flesh.
Alibech stared at this in
amazement and said: •
"Rustico, what is that I see
sticking out in front of
you, which I do not
possess?" • "Oh, my
daughter," said Rustico,
"this is the devil I was
telling you about. Do you
see what he's doing? He's
hurting me so much that I
can hardly endure it. " •
"Oh, praise be to God,"
said the girl, "I can see
that I am better off than
you are, for I have no such
devil to contend with." •
"You're right there;" said
Rustico. "But you have
something else instead, that
I haven't." • "Oh?" said
Alibech. "And what's
that?" • "You have Hell,"
said Rustico. "And I
honestly believe that God
has sent you here for the
salvation of my soul,
because if this devil
continues to plague the life
out of me, and if you are
prepared to take sufficient
pity upon me to let me put
him back into Hell, you
will be giving me
marvelous relief, as well as
rendering incalculable
service and pleasure to
God, which is what you
say you came here for in
the first place." • "Oh,
Father," replied the girl in
all innocence, "if I really
do have Hell, let's do as
you suggest just as soon as
you are ready." • "God
bless you, my daughter,"
said Rustico. "Let's go and
put him back, and then
perhaps he'll leave me
alone. " • At which point
