Good and Bad
In 1806, when Prussia and France were at war, Auguste, the handsome
twenty-four-year-old prince of Prussia and nephew of Frederick the
Great, was captured by Napoleon. Instead of locking him up, Napoleon al-
lowed him to wander around French territory, keeping a close watch on
him through spies. The prince was devoted to pleasure, and spent his time
moving from town to town, seducing young girls. In 1807 he decided to
visit the Château de Coppet, in Switzerland, where lived the great French
writer Madame de Stae'l.
Auguste was greeted by his hostess with as much ceremony as she could
muster. After she had introduced him to her other guests, they all retired to
a drawing room, where they talked of Napoleon's war in Spain, the current
Paris fashions, and so on. Suddenly the door opened and another guest en-
tered, a woman who had somehow stayed in her room during the hubbub
of the prince's entrance. It was the thirty-year-old Madame Récamier,
Madame de Staël's closest friend. She introduced herself to the prince, then
quickly retired to her bedroom.
Auguste had known that Madame Récamier was at the château. In fact
he had heard many stories about this infamous woman, who, in the years
after the French Revolution, was considered the most beautiful in France.
Men had gone wild over her, particularly at balls when she would take off
her evening wrap, revealing the diaphanous white dresses that she had made
famous, and dance with such abandon. The painters Gérard and David had
immortalized her face and fashions, and even her feet, considered the most
beautiful anyone had ever seen; and she had broken the heart of Lucien
Bonaparte, the Emperor Napoleon's brother. Auguste liked his girls
younger than Madame Récamier, and he had come to the château to rest.
But those few moments in which she had stolen the scene with her sudden
entrance caught him off guard: she was as beautiful as people had said, but
more striking than her beauty was that look of hers that seemed so sweet,
indeed heavenly, with a hint of sadness in the eyes. The other guests con-
tinued their conversations, but Auguste could only think of Madame
Récamier.
Over dinner that evening, he watched her. She did not talk much, and
kept her eyes downward, but once or twice she looked up—directly at the
prince. After dinner the guests assembled in the gallery, and a harp was
brought in. To the prince's delight, Madame Récamier began to play,Reichardt had seen Juliette
at another ball, protesting
coyly that she would not
dance, and then, after a
while, throwing off her
heavy evening gown, to
reveal a light dress
underneath. On all sides,
there were murmurs and
whisperings about her
coquetry and affectation.
As ever, she wore white
satin, cut very low in the
back, revealing her
charming shoulders. The
men implored her to dance
for them. ... To soft
music she floated into the
room in her diaphanous
Greek robe. Her head was
bound with a muslin fichu.
She bowed timidly to the
audience, and then,
spinning round lightly, she
shook a transparent scarf
with her fingertips, so that
in turns it billowed into the
semblance of a drapery, a
veil, a cloud. All this with
a strange blend of precision
and languor. She used her
eyes in a subtle fascinating
way— "she danced with
her eyes." The women
thought that all that
serpentine undulating of
the body, all that
nonchalant rhythmic
nodding of the head, were
sensuous; the men were
wafted into a realm of
187
188 • The Art of Seduction
singing a love song. And now, suddenly, she changed: there was a roguish
look in her eye as she glanced at him. The angelic voice, the glances, the
energy animating her face, sent his mind reeling. He was confused. When
the same thing happened the next night, the prince decided to extend his
stay at the château.
In the days that followed, the prince and Madame Récamier took walks
together, rowed out on the lake, and attended dances, where he finally held
her in his arms. They would talk late into the night. But nothing grew clear
to him: she would seem so spiritual, so noble, and then there would be
a touch of the hand, a sudden flirtatious remark. After two weeks at the
château, the most eligible bachelor in Europe forgot all his libertine habits
and proposed marriage to Madame Récamier. He would convert to Catholi-
cism, her religion, and she would divorce her much older husband. (She
had told him her marriage had never been consummated and so the
Catholic church could annul it.) She would then come to live with him in
Prussia. Madame promised to do as he wished. The prince hurried off to
Prussia to seek the approval of his family, and Madame returned to Paris
to secure the required annulment. Auguste flooded her with love letters,
and waited. Time passed; he felt he was going mad. Then, finally, a letter:
she had changed her mind.
Some months later, Madame Récamier sent Auguste a gift: Gérard's fa-
mous painting of her reclining on a sofa. The prince spent hours in front of
it, trying to pierce the mystery behind her gaze. He had joined the com-
pany of her conquests—of men like the writer Benjamin Constant, who
said of her, "She was my last love. For the rest of my life I was like a tree
struck by lightning."
Interpretation. Madame Récamier's list of conquests became only more
impressive as she grew older: there was Prince Metternich, the Duke of
Wellington, the writers Constant and Chateaubriand. For all of these men
she was an obsession, which only increased in intensity when they were
away from her. The source of her power was twofold. First, she had an an-
gelic face, which drew men to her. It appealed to paternal instincts, charm-
ing with its innocence. But then there was a second quality peeking
through, in the flirtatious looks, the wild dancing, the sudden gaiety—all
these caught men off guard. Clearly there was more to her than they had
thought, an intriguing complexity. When alone, they would find them-
selves pondering these contradictions, as if a poison were coursing through
their blood. Madame Récamier was an enigma, a problem that had to be
solved. Whatever it was that you wanted, whether a coquettish she-devil or
an unattainable goddess, she could seem to be. She surely encouraged this
illusion by keeping her men at a certain distance, so they could never figure
her out. And she was the queen of the calculated effect, like her surprise
entrance at the Château de Coppet, which made her the center of atten-
tion, if only for a few seconds.unearthly bliss. Juliette was
an ange fatal, and much
more dangerous for looking
like an angel! The music
grew fainter. Suddenly, by
a deft trick, Juliette's
chestnut hair was loosened
and fell in clouds around
her. A little out of breath,
she disappeared into her
dimly lit boudoir. And
there the crowd followed
her and beheld her reclining
on her daybed in a loose
tea-gown, looking
fashionably pale, like
Gérard's Psyche, while her
maids cooled her brow with
toilet water.
—MARGARET TROUNCER,
MADAME RÉCAMIER
The idea that two distinct
elements are combined in
Mona Lisa's smile is one
that has struck several
critics. They accordingly
find in the beautiful
Florentine's expression the
most perfect representation
of the contrasts that
dominate the erotic life of
women; the contrast
between reserve and
seduction, and between the
most devoted tenderness
and a sensuality that is
ruthlessly demanding—
consuming men as if they
were alien beings.
—SIGMUND FREUD, LEONARDO
DA VINCI AND A MEMORY OF
HIS CHILDHOOD, TRANSLATED
BY ALAN TYSON
[Oscar Wilde's] hands
were fat and flabby; his
handshake lacked grip, and
at a first encounter one
recoiled from its plushy
limpness, but this aversion
was soon overcome when
he began to talk, for his
genuine kindliness and
desire to please made one
forget what was unpleasant
