198 • The Art of Seduction
when they came back, Rée had the feeling that something physical had
happened between them. His blood boiled; Salomé was slipping from his
grasp.
Finally the group split up, the mother returning to Russia, Nietzsche to
his summer place in Tautenburg, Rée and Salomé staying behind at Rée's
home. But Salomé did not stay long: she accepted an invitation of Nietz-
sche's to visit him, unchaperoned, in Tautenburg. In her absence Rée was
consumed with doubts and anger. He wanted her more than ever, and was
prepared to redouble his efforts. When she finally came back, Rée vented
his bitterness, railing against Nietzsche, criticizing his philosophy, and ques-
tioning his motives toward the girl. But Salomé took Nietzsche's side. Rée
was in despair; he felt he had lost her for good. Yet a few days later she sur-
prised him again: she had decided she wanted to live with him, and with
him alone.
At last Rée had what he had wanted, or so he thought. The couple set-
tled in Berlin, where they rented an apartment together. But now, to Rée's
dismay, the old pattern repeated. They lived together but Salomé was
courted on all sides by young men. The darling of Berlin's intellectuals,
who admired her independent spirit, her refusal to compromise, she was
constantly surrounded by a harem of men, who referred to her as "Her Ex-
cellency." Once again Rée found himself competing for her attention.
Driven to despair, he left her a few years later, and eventually committed
suicide.
In 1911, Sigmund Freud met Salomé (now known as Lou Andreas-
Salomé) at a conference in Germany. She wanted to devote herself to the
psychoanalytical movement, she said, and Freud found her enchanting, al-
though, like everyone else, he knew the story of her infamous affair with
Nietzsche (see page 46, "The Dandy"). Salomé had no background in psy-
choanalysis or in therapy of any kind, but Freud admitted her into the in-
ner circle of followers who attended his private lectures. Soon after she
joined the circle, one of Freud's most promising and brilliant students, Dr.
Victor Tausk, sixteen years younger than Salomé, fell in love with her. Sa-
lomé's relationship with Freud had been platonic, but he had grown ex-
tremely fond of her. He was depressed when she missed a lecture, and
would send her notes and flowers. Her involvement in a love affair with
Tausk made him intensely jealous, and he began to compete for her atten-
tion. Tausk had been like a son to him, but the son was threatening to steal
the father's platonic lover. Soon, however, Salomé left Tausk. Now her
friendship with Freud was stronger than ever, and so it lasted until her
death, in 1937.
Interpretation. Men did not just fall in love with Lou Andreas-Salomé;
they were overwhelmed with the desire to possess her, to wrest her away
from others, to be the proud owner of her body and spirit. They rarely saw
her alone; she always in some way surrounded herself with other men.man most worthy of her
love in all the world. So,
never having set eyes on
him, she fell in love with
him so passionately that
she set out to win him not
for her friend but for
herself And in this she
succeeded with little effort,
for indeed she was a
woman more to be wooed
than to do the wooing.
And now listen to the
splendid sequel: not long
afterward it happened that
a letter which she had
written to her lover fell into
the hands of another
woman of comparable
rank, charm, and beauty;
and since she, like most
women, was curious and
eager to learn secrets, she
opened the letter and read
it. Realizing that it was
written from the depths of
passion, in the most loving
and ardent terms, she was
at first moved with
compassion, for she knew
very well from whom the
letter came and to whom it
was addressed; then,
however, such was the
power of the words she
read, turning them over in
her mind and considering
what kind of man it must
be who had been able to
arouse such great love, she
at once began to fall in love
with him herself; and the
letter was without doubt far
more effective than if the
young man had himself
written it to her. And just
as it sometimes happens
that the poison prepared for
a prince kills the one who
tastes his food, so that poor
woman, in her greediness,
drank the love potion
prepared for another. What
more is there to say? The
affair was no secret, and
things so developed that
many other women besides,
partly to spite the others
and partly to follow their
Appear to Be an Object of Desire—Create Triangles • 199
When she saw that Rée was interested in her, she mentioned her desire to
meet Nietzsche. This inflamed Rée, and made him want to marry her and
to keep him for himself, but she insisted on meeting his friend. His letters
to Nietzsche betrayed his desire for this woman, and this in turn kindled
Nietzsche's own desire for her, even before he had met her. Every time one
of the two men was alone with her, the other was in the background.
Then, later on, most of the men who met her knew of the infamous
Nietzsche affair, and this only increased their desire to possess her, to com-
pete with Nietzsche's memory. Freud's affection for her, similarly, turned
into potent desire when he had to vie with Tausk for her attention. Salomé
was intelligent and attractive enough on her own account; but her constant
strategy of imposing a triangle of relationships on her suitors made her de-
sirability intense. And while they fought over her, she had the power, being
desired by all and subject to none.
Our desire for another person almost always involves social considera-
tions: we are attracted to those who are attractive to other people. We want
to possess them and steal them away. You can believe all the sentimental
nonsense you want to about desire, but in the end, much of it has to do
with vanity and greed. Do not whine and moralize about people's selfish-
ness, but simply use it to your advantage. The illusion that you are desired
by others will make you more attractive to your victims than your beautiful
face or your perfect body. And the most effective way to create that illusion
is to create a triangle: impose another person between you and your victim,
and subtly make your victim aware of how much this other person wants
you. The third point on the triangle does not have to be just one person:
surround yourself with admirers, reveal your past conquests—in other
words, envelop yourself in an aura of desirability. Make your targets com-
pete with your past and your present. They will long to possess you all to
themselves, giving you great power for as long as you elude their grasp. Fail
to make yourself an object of desire right from the start, and you will end
up the sorry slave to the whims of your lovers—they will abandon you the
moment they lose interest.
[A person] will desire any object so long as he is convinced
that it is desired by another person whom he admires.
—RENÉ GIRARD
Keys to Seduction
We are social creatures, and are immensely influenced by the tastes and
desires of other people. Imagine a large social gathering. You see a
man alone, whom nobody talks to for any length of time, and who is wan-
dering around without company; isn't there a kind of self-fulfilling isola-
tion about him? Why is he alone, why is he avoided? There has to be a
reason. Until someone takes pity on this man and starts up a conversationexample, put every care
and effort into winning this
man's love, squabbling over
it for a while as boys do
for cherries.
—BALDASSARE CASTIGLIONE,
THE BOOK OFTHE COURTIER,
TRANSLATED BY GEORGE BULL
Most of the time we prefer
one thing to another
because that is what our
friends already prefer or
because that object has
marked social significance.
Adults, when they are
hungry, are just like
children in that they seek
out the foods that others
take. In their love affairs,
they seek out the man or
woman whom others find
attractive and abandon
those who are not sought
after. When we say of a
man or woman that he or
she is desirable, what we
really mean is that others
desire them. It is not that
they have some particular
quality, but because they
conform to some currently
modish model.
—SERGE MOSCOVICI, THE AGE
OF THE CROWD:A HISTORICAL
TREATISE ON MASS PSYCHOL-
OGY, TRANSLATED BY J. C.
WHITEHOUSE
It will be greatly to your
advantage to entertain the
lady you would win with
an account of the number
of women who are in love
with you, and of the
decided advances which
they have made to you; for
this will not only prove
that you are a great favorite
with the ladies, and a man
of true honor, but it will
convince her that she may
have the honor of being
enrolled in the same list,
and of being praised in the
