
The Art of Charm
Sexuality is extremely disruptive. The insecurities and emotions it stirs
up can often cut short a relationship that would otherwise be deeper
and longer lasting. The Charmer's solution is to fulfill the aspects of
sexuality that are so alluring and addictive—the focused attention, the
boosted self-esteem, the pleasurable wooing, the understanding (real or
illusory)—but subtract the sex itself. It's not that the Charmer represses
or discourages sexuality; lurking beneath the surface of any attempt at
charm is a sexual tease, a possibility. Charm cannot exist without a hint of
sexual tension. It cannot be maintained, however, unless sex is kept at bay
or in the background.
The word "charm" comes from the Latin carmen, a song, but also an in-
cantation tied to the casting of a magical spell. The Charmer implicitly
grasps this history, casting a spell by giving people something that holds
their attention, that fascinates them. And the secret to capturing people's
attention, while lowering their powers of reason, is to strike at the things
they have the least control over: their ego, their vanity, and their self-
esteem. As Benjamin Disraeli said, "Talk to a man about himself and
he will listen for hours." The strategy can never be obvious; subtlety is the
Charmer's great skill. If the target is to be kept from seeing through
the Charmer's efforts, and from growing suspicious, maybe even tiring of the
attention, a light touch is essential. The Charmer is like a beam of light that
doesn't play directly on a target but throws a pleasantly diffused glow over it.
Charm can be applied to a group as well as to an individual: a leader
can charm the public. The dynamic is similar. The following are the laws of
charm, culled from the stories of the most successful charmers in history.
Make your target the center of attention. Charmers fade into the back-
ground; their targets become the subject of their interest. To be a Charmer
you have to learn to listen and observe. Let your targets talk, revealing
themselves in the process. As you find out more about them—their
strengths, and more important their weaknesses—you can individualize
your attention, appealing to their specific desires and needs, tailoring your
flatteries to their insecurities. By adapting to their spirit and empathizing
with their woes, you can make them feel bigger and better, validating their
sense of self-worth. Make them the star of the show and they will becomeBirds are taken with pipes
that imitate their own
voices, and men with those
sayings that are most
agreeable to their own
opinions.
—SAMUEL BUTLER
Go with the bough, you'll
bend it; \ Use brute force,
it'll snap. \ Go with the
current: that's how to swim
across rivers— \ Fighting
upstream's no good. \ Go
easy with lions or tigers if
you aim to tame them; \
The bull gets inured to the
plough by slow degrees. . . . \
So, yield if she shows
resistance: \ That way
you'll win in the end. fust
be sure to play \ The part
she allots you. Censure the
things she censures, \
Endorse her endorsements,
echo her every word, \ Pro
or con, and laugh whenever
she laughs; remember, \ If
she weeps, to weep too:
take your cue \ From her
every expression. Suppose
she's playing a board game,
\ Then throw the dice
carelessly, move \ Your
pieces all wrong. . . . \
Don't jib at a slavish task
like holding \ Her mirror:
81
