Pay Attention to Detail • 271
suitors, the emperor himself—the more she realized that none could com-
pare to Genji. He was supposed to be her protector, yes, that was still true,
but was it such a sin to fall in love with him? Confused, she found herself
giving in to the caresses and kisses that he began to surprise her with, now
that she was too weak to resist.
Interpretation. Genji is the protagonist in the eleventh-century novel The
Tale of Genji, written by Murasaki Shikibu, a woman of the Heian court.
The character was most likely inspired by the real-life seducer Fujiwara no
Korechika.
In his seduction of Tamakazura, Genji's strategy was simple: he would
make her realize indirectly how charming and irresistible he was by sur-
rounding her with unspoken details. He also brought her in contact with
his brother; comparison with this drab, stiff figure would make Genji's su-
periority clear. The night Hotaru first visited her, Genji set everything up,
as if to support Hotaru's seducing—the mysterious scent, then the flash of
light by the screen. (The light came from a novel effect: earlier in the eve-
ning, Genji had collected hundreds of fireflies in a cloth bag. At the proper
moment he let them all go at once.) But when Tamakazura saw Genji en-
couraging Hotaru's pursuit of her, her defenses against her protector re-
laxed, allowing her senses to be filled by this master of seductive effects.
Genji orchestrated every possible detail—the scented paper, the colored
robes, the lights in the garden, the wild carnations, the apt poetry, the koto
lessons which induced an irresistible feeling of harmony. Tamakazura found
herself dragged into a sensual whirlpool. Bypassing the shyness and mistrust
that words or actions would only have worsened, Genji surrounded his
ward with objects, sights, sounds, and scents that symbolized the pleasure of
his company far more than his actual physical presence would have—in fact
his presence could only have been threatening. He knew that a young girl's
senses are her most vulnerable point.
The key to Genji's masterful orchestration of detail was his attention to
the target of his seduction. Like Genji, you must attune your own senses to
your targets, watching them carefully, adapting to their moods. You sense
when they are defensive and retreat. You also sense when they are giving in,
and move forward. In between, the details you set up—gifts, entertain-
ments, the clothes you wear, the flowers you choose—are aimed precisely
at their tastes and predilections. Genji knew he was dealing with a young
girl who loved romantic novels; his wild flowers, koto playing, and poetry
brought their world to life for her. Attend to your targets' every move and
desire, and reveal your attentiveness in the details and objects you surround
them with, filling their senses with the mood you need to inspire. They can
argue with your words, but not with the effect you have on their senses.right now. " • "You'll have
to think of a better excuse
than that," Bright Design
said. "Isn't there anything
that you can send or want
to borrow? I don't want to
go there and feel like a fool
without anything to say. " •
Pao-yu thought for a
moment and then took two
handkerchiefs from under
his pillow and gave them
to the maid, saying, "Well
then, tell her that I sent
you with these," • "What
a strange present to send"
the maid smiled. "What
does she want two old
handkerchiefs for? She will
be angry again and say
that you are trying to make
fun of her." • "Don't
worry" Pao-yu assured her.
"She will understand." •
Black Jade had already
retired when Bright Design
arrived at the Bamboo
Retreat. "What brought
you at this hour?" Black
Jade asked. • "[Pao-yu]
asked me to bring these
handkerchiefs for [Black
Jade]." • For a moment
Black Jade was at a loss to
see why Pao-yu should
send her such a present at
that particular moment.
She said, "I suppose they
must be something unusual
that somebody gave him.
Tell him to keep them
himself or give them to
someone who will
appreciate them. I have no
need of them." • "They
are nothing unusual,"
Bright Design said. "Just
two ordinary handkerchiefs
that he happened to have
around. " Black Jade was
even more puzzled, and
then it suddenly dawned
upon her: Pao-yu knew
that she would weep for
him and so sent two
handkerchiefs of his own. •
"You can leave them,
then," she said to Bright
Design, who in turn was
272 • The Art of Seduction
Therefore in my view when the courtier wishes to declare
his love he should do so by his actions rather than by
speech, for a man's feelings are sometimes more clearly re-
vealed by ... a gesture of respect or a certain shyness than
by volumes of words.
—BALDASSARE CASTIGLIONE
Keys to Seduction
When we were children, our senses were much more active. The col-
ors of a new toy, or a spectacle such as a circus, held us in thrall; a
smell or a sound could fascinate us. In the games we created, many of them
reproducing something in the adult world on a smaller scale, what pleasure
we took in orchestrating every detail. We noticed everything.
As we grow older our senses get dulled. We no longer notice as much,
for we are constantly hurrying to get things done, to move on to the next
task. In seduction, you are always trying to bring the target back to the
golden moments of childhood. A child is less rational, more easily de-
ceived. A child is also more attuned to the pleasures of the senses. So when
your targets are with you, you must never give them the feeling they nor-
mally get in the real world, where we are all rushed, ruthless, out for our-
selves. You need to deliberately slow things down, and return them to the
simpler times of their youth. The details that you orchestrate—colors, gifts,
little ceremonies—are aimed at their senses, at the childish delight we take
in the immediate charms of the natural world. Their senses filled with de-
lightful things, they grow less capable of reason and rationality. Pay atten-
tion to detail and you will find yourself assuming a slower pace; your targets
will not focus on what you might be after (sexual favors, power, etc.) be-
cause you seem so considerate, so attentive. In the childish realm of the
senses in which you envelop them, they get a clear sense that you are in-
volving them in something distinct from the real world—an essential ingre-
dient of seduction. Remember: the more you get people to focus on the
little things, the less they will notice your larger direction. The seduction
will assume the slow, hypnotic pace of a ritual, in which the details have a
heightened importance and the moments are full of ceremony.
In eighth-century China, Emperor Ming Huang caught a glimpse of a
beautiful young woman, combing her hair beside an imperial pool. Her
name was Yang Kuei-fei, and even though she was the concubine of the
emperor's son, he had to have her for himself. Since he was emperor, no-
body could stop him. The emperor was a practical man—he had many
concubines, and they all had their charms, but he had never lost his head
over a woman. Yang Kuei-fei, though, was different. Her body exuded the
most wonderful fragrance. She wore gowns made of the sheerest silk gauze,
each embroidered with different flowers, depending on the season. In
walking she seemed to float, her tiny steps invisible beneath her gown. Shesurprised that Black Jade
did not take offense at
what seemed to her a crude
joke. • As Black Jade
thought over the signif-
icance of the handkerchiefs
she was happy and sad by
turns: happy because Pao-
yu read her innermost
thoughts and sad because
she wondered if what was
uppermost in her thoughts
would ever be fulfilled.
Thinking thus to herself of
the future and of the past,
she could not fall asleep.
Despite Purple Cuckoo's
remonstrances, she had her
lamp relit and began to
compose a series of
quatrains, writing them
directly on the
handkerchiefs which
Pao-yu had sent.
—TSAO HSUEH CHIN,
DREAM OF THE RED CHAMBER,
TRANSLATED BY CHI-CHEN
WANG
