152 • The Art of Seduction
propriate and acceptable behavior. Prudes rigorously stay within the bounda-
ries of correctness because more than anything they fear society's judg-
ment. Seen in this light, prudery is just as prevalent as it always was.
The New Prude is excessively concerned with standards of goodness,
fairness, political sensitivity, tastefulness, etc. What marks the New Prude,
though, as well as the old one, is that deep down they are actually excited
and intrigued by guilty, transgressive pleasures. Frightened by this attrac-
tion, they run in the opposite direction and become the most correct of all.
They tend to wear drab colors; they certainly never take fashion risks. They
can be very judgmental and critical of people who do take risks and are less
correct. They are also addicted to routine, which gives them a way to tamp
down their inner turmoil.
New Prudes are secretly oppressed by their correctness and long to
transgress. Just as sexual prudes make prime targets for a Rake or Siren, the
New Prude will often be most tempted by someone with a dangerous or
naughty side. If you desire a New Prude, do not be taken in by their judg-
ments of you or their criticisms. That is only a sign of how deeply you fas-
cinate them; you are on their mind. You can often draw a New Prude into
a seduction, in fact, by giving them the chance to criticize you or even try
to reform you. Take nothing of what they say to heart, of course, but now
you have the perfect excuse to spend time with them—and New Prudes
can be seduced simply through being in contact with you. These types ac-
tually make excellent and rewarding victims. Once you open them up and
get them to let go of their correctness, they are flooded with feelings and
energies. They may even overwhelm you. Perhaps they are in a relationship
with someone as drab as they themselves seem to be—do not be put off.
They are simply asleep, waiting to be awakened.
The Crushed Star. We all want attention, we all want to shine, but with
most of us these desires are fleeting and easily quieted. The problem with
Crushed Stars is that at one point in their lives they did find themselves the
center of attention—perhaps they were beautiful, charming and efferves-
cent, perhaps they were athletes, or had some other talent—but those days
are gone. They may seem to have accepted this, but the memory of having
once shone is hard to get over. In general, the appearance of wanting atten-
tion, of trying to stand out, is not seen too kindly in polite society or in the
workplace. So to get along, Crushed Stars learn to tamp down their desires;
but failing to get the attention they feel they deserve, they also become re-
sentful. You can recognize Crushed Stars by certain unguarded moments:
they suddenly receive some attention in a social setting, and it makes them
glow; they mention their glory days, and there is a little glint in the eye; a
little wine in the system, and they become effervescent.
Seducing this type is simple: just make them the center of attention.
When you are with them, act as if they were stars and you were basking in
their glow. Get them to talk, particularly about themselves. In social situa-
The Seducer's Victims—The Eighteen Types • 153
tions, mute your own colors and let them look funny and radiant by com-
parison. In general, play the Charmer. The reward of seducing Crushed
Stars is that you stir up powerful emotions. They will feel intensely grateful
to you for letting them shine. To whatever extent they had felt crushed and
bottled up, the easing of that pain releases intensity and passion, all directed
at you. They will fall madly in love. If you yourself have any star or dandy
tendencies it is wise to avoid such victims. Sooner or later those tendencies
will come out, and the competition between you will be ugly.
The Novice. What separates Novices from ordinary innocent young peo-
ple is that they are fatally curious. They have little or no experience of the
world, but have been exposed to it secondhand—in newspapers, films,
books. Finding their innocence a burden, they long to be initiated into the
ways of the world. Everyone sees them as so sweet and innocent, but they
know this isn't so—they cannot be as angelic as people think them.
Seducing a Novice is easy. To do it well, however, requires a bit of art.
Novices are interested in people with experience, particularly people with
a touch of corruption and evil. Make that touch too strong, though, and it
will intimidate and frighten them. What works best with a Novice is a mix
of qualities. You are somewhat childlike yourself, with a playful spirit. At
the same time, it is clear that you have hidden depths, even sinister ones.
(This was the secret of Lord Byron's success with so many innocent
women.) You are initiating your Novices not just sexually but experien-
tially, exposing them to new ideas, taking them to new places, new worlds
both literal and metaphoric. Do not make your seduction ugly or seedy—
everything must be romantic, even including the evil and dark side of life.
Young people have their ideals; it is best to initiate them with an aesthetic
touch. Seductive language works wonders on Novices, as does attention to
detail. Spectacles and colorful events appeal to their sensitive senses. They
are easily misled by these tactics, because they lack the experience to see
through them.
Sometimes Novices are a little older and have been at least somewhat
educated in the ways of the world. Yet they put on a show of innocence,
for they see the power it has over older people. These are coy Novices,
aware of the game they are playing—but Novices they remain. They may
be less easily misled than purer Novices, but the way to seduce them is
pretty much the same—mix innocence and corruption and you will fasci-
nate them.
The Conqueror. These types have an unusual amount of energy, which
they find difficult to control. They are always on the prowl for people to
conquer, obstacles to surmount. You will not always recognize Conquerors
by their exterior—they can seem a little shy in social situations and can
have a degree of reserve. Look not at their words or appearance but at their
