304 • The Art of Seduction
lose touch with reality, they are (to quote Stendhal on Lord Byron's female
victims) like roasted larks that fall into your mouth.
Most people have a misconception about illusion. As any magician
knows, it need not be built out of anything grand or theatrical; the grand
and theatrical can in fact be destructive, calling too much attention to you
and your schemes. Instead create the appearance of normality. Once your
targets feel secure—nothing is out of the ordinary—you have room to de-
ceive them. Pei Pu did not spin the lie about his gender immediately; he
took his time, made Bouriscout come to him. Once Bouriscout had fallen
for it, Pei Pu continued to wear men's clothes. In animating a fantasy, the
great mistake is imagining it must be larger than life. That would border on
camp, which is entertaining but rarely seductive. Instead, what you aim for
is what Freud called the "uncanny," something strange and familiar at the
same time, like a deja vu, or a childhood memory—anything slightly irra-
tional and dreamlike. The uncanny, the mix of the real and the unreal, has
immense power over our imaginations. The fantasies you bring to life for
your targets should not be bizarre or exceptional; they should be rooted in
reality, with a hint of the strange, the theatrical, the occult (in talk of des-
tiny, for example). You vaguely remind people of something in their child-
hood, or a character in a film or book. Even before Bouriscout heard Pei
Pu's story, he had the uncanny feeling of something remarkable and fantas-
tical in this normal-looking man. The secret to creating an uncanny effect
is to keep it subtle and suggestive.
Emma Hart came from a prosaic background, her father a country
blacksmith in eighteenth-century England. Emma was beautiful, but had
no other talents to her credit. Yet she rose to become one of the greatest
seductresses in history, seducing first Sir William Hamilton, the English
ambassador to the court of Naples, and then (as Lady Hamilton, Sir Wil-
liam's wife) Vice-Admiral Lord Nelson. What was strangest when you met
her was an uncanny sense that she was a figure from the past, a woman out
of Greek myth or ancient history. Sir William was a collector of Greek and
Roman antiquities; to seduce him, Emma cleverly made herself resemble a
Greek statue, and mythical figures in paintings of the time. It was not just
the way she wore her hair, or dressed, but her poses, the way she carried
herself. It was as if one of the paintings he collected had come to life. Soon
Sir William began to host parties in his home in Naples at which Emma
would wear costumes and pose, re-creating images from mythology and
history. Dozens of men fell in love with her, for she embodied an image
from their childhood, an image of beauty and perfection. The key to this
fantasy creation was some shared cultural association—mythology, historical
seductresses like Cleopatra. Every culture has a pool of such figures from
the distant and not-so-distant past. You hint at a similarity, in spirit and in
appearance—but you are flesh and blood. What could be more thrilling
than the sense of being in the presence of some fantasy figure going back
to your earliest memories?
One night Pauline Bonaparte, the sister of Napoleon, held a gala affair
Confuse Desire and Reality—The Perfect Illusion • 305
in her house. Afterward, a handsome German officer approached her in the
garden and asked for her help in passing along a request to the emperor.
Pauline said she would do her best, and then, with a rather mysterious look
in her eye, asked him to come back to the same spot the next night. The
officer returned, and was greeted by a young woman who led him to some
rooms near the garden and then to a magnificent salon, complete with an
extravagant bath. Moments later, another young woman entered through a
side door, dressed in the sheerest garments. It was Pauline. Bells were rung,
ropes were pulled, and maids appeared, preparing the bath, giving the offi-
cer a dressing gown, then disappearing. The officer later described the eve-
ning as something out of a fairy tale, and he had the feeling that Pauline
was deliberately acting the part of some mythical seductress. Pauline was
beautiful and powerful enough to get almost any man she wanted, and she
wasn't interested simply in luring a man into bed; she wanted to envelop
him in romantic adventure, seduce his mind. Part of the adventure was the
feeling that she was playing a role, and was inviting her target along into
this shared fantasy.
Role playing is immensely pleasurable. Its appeal goes back to child-
hood, where we first learn the thrill of trying on different parts, imitating
adults or figures out of fiction. As we get older and society fixes a role on
us, a part of us yearns for the playful approach we once had, the masks we
were able to wear. We still want to play that game, to act a different role in
life. Indulge your targets in this wish by first making it clear that you are
playing a role, then inviting them to join you in a shared fantasy. The more
you set things up like a play or a piece of fiction, the better. Notice how
Pauline began the seduction with a mysterious request that the officer reap-
pear the next night; then a second woman led him into a magical series of
rooms. Pauline herself delayed her entrance, and when she appeared, she
did not mention his business with Napoleon, or anything remotely banal.
She had an ethereal air about her; he was being invited to enter a fairy
tale. The evening was real, but had an uncanny resemblance to an erotic
dream.
Casanova took role playing still further. He traveled with an enormous
wardrobe and a trunk full of props, many of them gifts for his targets—
fans, jewels, other accouterments. And some of the things he said and did
were borrowed from novels he had read and stories he had heard. He en-
veloped women in a romantic atmosphere that was heightened yet quite
real to their senses. Like Casanova, you must see the world as a kind of the-
ater. Inject a certain lightness into the roles you are playing; try to create a
sense of drama and illusion; confuse people with the slight unreality of
words and gestures inspired by fiction; in daily life, be the consummate ac-
tor. Our culture reveres actors because of their freedom to play roles. It is
something that all of us envy.
For years, the Cardinal de Rohan had been afraid that he had somehow
offended his queen, Marie Antoinette. She would not so much as look at
him. Then, in 1784, the Comtesse de Lamotte-Valois suggested to him that
