Master the Art of Insinuation • 215
and safeguarding her guiltless reputation, all in one stroke. After all, he was
the one who initiated physical contact, or so it seemed. In truth, she was the
one in control, planting precisely the ideas in his mind that she wanted. That
first physical encounter in the carriage, for instance, that she had set up by
inviting him closer: she later rebuked him for being forward, but what lin-
gered in his mind was the excitement of the moment. Her talk of the
countess made him confused and guilty; but then she hinted that his lover
was unfaithful, planting a different seed in his mind: anger, and the desire for
revenge. Then she asked him to forget what she had said and forgive her
for saying it, a key insinuating tactic: "I am asking you to forget what I have
said, but I know you cannot; the thought will remain in your mind." Pro-
voked this way, it was inevitable he would grab her in the pavilion. She sev-
eral times mentioned the room in the château—of course he insisted on
going there. She enveloped the evening in an air of ambiguity. Even her
words "If you promise to be good" could be read several ways. The young
man's head and heart were inflamed with all of the feelings—discontent,
confusion, desire—that she had indirectly instilled in him.
Particularly in the early phases of a seduction, learn to make everything
you say and do a kind of insinuation. Insinuate doubt with a comment here
and there about other people in the victim's life, making the victim feel
vulnerable. Slight physical contact insinuates desire, as does a fleeting but
memorable look, or an unusually warm tone of voice, both for the briefest
of moments. A passing comment suggests that something about the victim
interests you; but keep it subtle, your words revealing a possibility, creating a
doubt. You are planting seeds that will take root in the weeks to come.
When you are not there, your targets will fantasize about the ideas you have
stirred up, and brood upon the doubts. They are slowly being led into your
web, unaware that you are in control. How can they resist or become de-
fensive if they cannot even see what is happening?
What distinguishes a suggestion from other kinds of psy-
chical influence, such as a command or the giving of a piece
of information or instruction, is that in the case of a sug-
gestion an idea is aroused in another person's brain which
is not examined in regard to its origin but is accepted just
as though it had arisen spontaneously in that brain.
—SIGMUND FREUD
Keys to Seduction
You cannot pass through life without in one way or another trying to
persuade people of something. Take the direct route, saying exactly
what you want, and your honesty may make you feel good but you are
probably not getting anywhere. People have their own sets of ideas, which
are hardened into stone by habit; your words, entering their minds, com-a letter, for fear of the
dangers that this might
entail. But having
perceived that he was on
very friendly terms with a
certain priest, a rotund,
uncouth, individual who
was nevertheless regarded
as an outstandingly able
friar on account of his very
saintly way of life, she
calculated that this fellow
would serve as an ideal go-
between for her and the
man she loved. And so,
after reflecting on the
strategy she would adopt,
she paid a visit, at an
appropriate hour of the
day, to the church where he
was to be found, and
having sought him out, she
asked him whether he
would agree to confess her.
• Since he could tell at a
glance that she was a lady
of quality, the friar gladly
heard her confession, and
when she had got to the
end of it, she continued as
follows: • "Father, as I
shall explain to you
presently, there is a certain
matter about which I am
compelled to seek your
advice and assistance.
Having already told you
my name, I feel sure you
will know my family and
my husband. He loves me
more dearly than life itself,
and since he is enormously
rich, he never has the
slightest difficulty or
hesitation in supplying me
with every single object for
which I display a yearning.
Consequently, my love for
him is quite unbounded,
and if my mere thoughts,
to say nothing of my actual
behavior, were to run
contrary to his wishes and
his honor, I would be more
deserving of hellfire than
the wickedest woman who
ever lived. • "Now, there is
a certain person, of
respectable outward
216 • The Art of Seduction
pete with the thousands of preconceived notions that are already there, and
get nowhere. Besides, people resent your attempt to persuade them, as if
they were incapable of deciding by themselves—as if you knew better.
Consider instead the power of insinuation and suggestion. It requires some
patience and art, but the results are more than worth it.
The way insinuation works is simple: disguised in a banal remark or en-
counter, a hint is dropped. It is about some emotional issue—a possible
pleasure not yet attained, a lack of excitement in a person's life. The hint
registers in the back of the target's mind, a subtle stab at his or her insecuri-
ties; its source is quickly forgotten. It is too subtle to be memorable at the
time, and later, when it takes root and grows, it seems to have emerged
naturally from the target's own mind, as if it was there all along. Insinuation
lets you bypass people's natural resistance, for they seem to be listening only
to what has originated in themselves. It is a language on its own, communi-
cating directly with the unconscious. No seducer, no persuader, can hope
to succeed without mastering the language and art of insinuation.
A strange man once arrived at the court of Louis XV. No one knew
anything about him, and his accent and age were unplaceable. He called
himself Count Saint-Germain. He was obviously wealthy; all kinds of gems
and diamonds glittered on his jacket, his sleeves, his shoes, his fingers. He
could play the violin to perfection, paint magnificently. But the most in-
toxicating thing about him was his conversation.
In truth, the count was the greatest charlatan of the eighteenth
century—a man who had mastered the art of insinuation. As he spoke, a
word here and there would slip out—a vague allusion to the philosopher's
stone, which turned base metal into gold, or to the elixir of life. He did not
say he possessed these things, but he made you associate him with their
powers. Had he simply claimed to have them, no one would have believed
him and people would have turned away. The count might refer to a man
who had died forty years earlier as if he had known him personally; had
this been so, the count would have had to be in his eighties, although he
looked to be in his forties. He mentioned the elixir of life. ... he seems so
young. . . .
The key to the count's words was vagueness. He always dropped his
hints into a lively conversation, grace notes in an ongoing melody. Only
later would people reflect on what he had said. After a while, people started
to come to him, inquiring about the philosopher's stone and the elixir of
life, not realizing that it was he who had planted these ideas in their minds.
Remember: to sow a seductive idea you must engage people's imaginations,
their fantasies, their deepest yearnings. What sets the wheels spinning is
suggesting things that people already want to hear—the possibility of plea-
sure, wealth, health, adventure. In the end, these good things turn out to be
precisely what you seem to offer them. They will come to you as if on
their own, unaware that you insinuated the idea in their heads.
In 1807, Napoleon Bonaparte decided it was critical for him to win
the Russian Czar Alexander I to his side. He wanted two things out of theappearance, who unless I
am mistaken is a close
acquaintance of yours. I
really couldn't say what his
name is, but he is tall and
handsome, his clothes are
brown and elegantly cut,
and, possibly because he is
unaware of my resolute
nature, he appears to have
laid siege to me. He turns
up infallibly whenever I
either look out of my
window or stand at the
front door or leave the
house, and I am surprised,
in fact, that he is not here
now. Needless to say, I am
very upset about all this,
because his sort of conduct
frequently gives an honest
woman a bad name, even
though she is quite
innocent. • " . . . For the
love of God, therefore, I
implore you to speak to
him severely and persuade
him to refrain from his
importunities. There are
plenty of other women who
doubtless find this sort of
thing amusing, and who
will enjoy being ogled and
spied upon by him, but I
personally have no
inclination for it
whatsoever, and I find his
behavior exceedingly
disagreeable." • And
having reached the end of
her speech, the lady bowed
her head as though she
were going to burst into
tears. • The reverend friar
realized immediately who
it was to whom she was
referring, and having
warmly commended her
purity of mind . . . he
promised to take all
necessary steps to ensure
that the fellow ceased to
annoy her. . . . • Shortly
afterward, the gentleman in
question paid one of his
regular visits to the
reverend friar, and after
they had conversed together
for a while on general
