Typology of the Anti-Seducers
Anti-Seducers come in many shapes and kinds, but almost all of them
share a single attribute, the source of their repellence: insecurity. We
are all insecure, and we suffer for it. Yet we are able to surmount these feel-
ings at times; a seductive engagement can bring us out of our usual self-
absorption, and to the degree that we seduce or are seduced, we feel
charged and confident. Anti-Seducers, however, are insecure to such a de-
gree that they cannot be drawn into the seductive process. Their needs,
their anxieties, their self-consciousness close them off. They interpret the
slightest ambiguity on your part as a slight to their ego; they see the merest
hint of withdrawal as a betrayal, and are likely to complain bitterly about it.
It seems easy: Anti-Seducers repel, so be repelled—avoid them. Unfor-
tunately, however, many Anti-Seducers cannot be detected as such at first
glance. They are more subtle, and unless you are careful they will ensnare
you in a most unsatisfying relationship. You must look for clues to their
self-involvement and insecurity: perhaps they are ungenerous, or they argue
with unusual tenacity, or are excessively judgmental. Perhaps they lavish
you with undeserved praise, declaring their love before knowing anything
about you. Or, most important, they pay no attention to details. Since they
cannot see what makes you different, they cannot surprise you with nu-
anced attention.
It is critical to recognize anti-seductive qualities not only in others but
also in ourselves. Almost all of us have one or two of the Anti-Seducer's
qualities latent in our character, and to the extent that we can consciously
root them out, we become more seductive. A lack of generosity, for in-
stance, need not signal an Anti-Seducer if it is a person's only fault, but an
ungenerous person is seldom truly attractive. Seduction implies opening
yourself up, even if only for the purposes of deception; being unable to
give by spending money usually means being unable to give in general.
Stamp ungenerosity out. It is an impediment to power and a gross sin in
seduction.
It is best to disengage from Anti-Seducers early on, before they sink
their needy tentacles into you, so learn to read the signs. These are the
main types.Count Lodovico then
remarked with a smile:
"I promise you that our
sensible courtier will never
act so stupidly to gain a
woman's favor." • Cesare
Gonzaga replied: "Nor so
stupidly as a gentleman I
remember, of some repute,
whom to spare men's
blushes I don't wish to
mention by name. " •
"Well, at least tell us what
he did," said the Duchess.
• Then Cesare continued:
"He was loved by a very
great lady, and at her
request he came secretly to
the town where she was.
After he had seen her and
enjoyed her company for as
long as she would let him
in the time, he sighed and
wept bitterly, to show the
anguish he was suffering at
having to leave her, and he
begged her never to forget
him; and then he added
that she should pay for his
lodging at the inn, since it
was she who had sent for
him and he thought it only
right, therefore, that he
shouldn't be involved in
any expense over the
journey." • At this, all the
133
134 • The Art of Seduction
The Brute. If seduction is a kind of ceremony or ritual, part of the plea-
sure is its duration—the time it takes, the waiting that increases anticipa-
tion. Brutes have no patience for such things; they are concerned only with
their own pleasure, never with yours. To be patient is to show that you are
thinking of the other person, which never fails to impress. Impatience has
the opposite effect: assuming you are so interested in them you have no rea-
son to wait, Brutes offend you with their egotism. Underneath that ego-
tism, too, there is often a gnawing sense of inferiority, and if you spurn
them or make them wait, they overreact. If you suspect you are dealing
with a Brute, do a test—make that person wait. His or her response will tell
you everything you need to know.
The Suffocator. Suffocators fall in love with you before you are even half-
aware of their existence. The trait is deceptive—you might think they have
found you overwhelming—but the fact is they suffer from an inner void, a
deep well of need that cannot be filled. Never get involved with Suffoca-
tors; they are almost impossible to free yourself from without trauma. They
cling to you until you are forced to pull back, whereupon they smother you
with guilt. We tend to idealize a loved one, but love takes time to develop.
Recognize Suffocators by how quickly they adore you. To be so admired
may give a momentary boost to your ego, but deep inside you sense that
their intense emotions are not related to anything you have done. Trust
these instincts.
A subvariant of the Suffocator is the Doormat, a person who slavishly
imitates you. Spot these types early on by seeing whether they are capable
of having an idea of their own. An inability to disagree with you is a bad
sign.
The Moralizer. Seduction is a game, and should be undertaken with a
light heart. All is fair in love and seduction; morality never enters the pic-
ture. The character of the Moralizer, however, is rigid. These are people
who follow fixed ideas and try to make you bend to their standards. They
want to change you, to make you a better person, so they endlessly criticize
and judge—that is their pleasure in life. In truth, their moral ideas stem
from their own unhappiness, and mask their desire to dominate those
around them. Their inability to adapt and to enjoy makes them easy to rec-
ognize; their mental rigidity may also be accompanied by a physical stiff-
ness. It is hard not to take their criticisms personally so it is better to avoid
their presence and their poisoned comments.
The Tightwad. Cheapness signals more than a problem with money. It is a
sign of something constricted in a person's character—something that
keeps them from letting go or taking a risk. It is the most anti-seductiveladies began to laugh and
to say that the man
concerned hardly deserved
the name of gentleman;
and many of the men felt
as ashamed as he should
have been, had he ever had
the sense to recognize such
disgraceful behavior for
what it was.
—BALDASSARE CASTIGLIONE,
THE BOOK OF THE COURTIER,
TRANSLATED BY GEORGE BULL
Let us see now how love is
diminished. This happens
through the easy
accessibility of its
consolations, through one's
being able to see and
converse lengthily with a
lover, through a lover's
unsuitable garb and gait,
and by the sudden onset of
poverty. . . . • Another
cause of diminution of love
is the realization of the
notoriety of one's lover, and
accounts of his miserliness,
bad character, and general
wickedness; also any affair
with another woman, even
if it involves no feelings of
love. Love is also
diminished if a woman
realizes that her lover is
foolish and undiscerning, or
if she sees him going too far
in demands of love, giving
no thought to his partner's
modesty nor wishing to
pardon her blushes. A
faithful lover ought to
choose the harshest pains of
love rather than by his
demands cause his partner
embarrassment, or take
pleasure in spurning her
modesty; for one who
thinks only of the outcome
of his own pleasure, and
ignores the welfare of his
partner, should be called a
traitor rather than a lover. •
Love also suffers decrease if
the woman realizes that
her lover is fearful in war,
