
The Perfect Climax
Through a campaign of deception—the misleading appearance of a
transformation into goodness—the rake Valmont laid siege to the vir-
tuous young Présidente de Tourvel until the day came when, disturbed by
his confession of love for her, she insisted he leave the château where both
of them were staying as guests. He complied. From Paris, however, he
flooded her with letters, describing his love for her in the most intense
terms; she begged him to stop, and once again he complied. Then, several
weeks later, he paid a surprise visit to the château. In his company Tourvel
was flushed and jumpy, and kept her eyes averted—all signs of his effect on
her. Again she asked him to leave. What have you to fear? he replied, I have
always done what you have asked, I have never forced myself on you. He
kept his distance and she slowly relaxed. She no longer left the room when
he entered, and she could look at him directly. When he offered to accom-
pany her on a walk, she did not refuse. They were friends, she said. She
even put her arm in his as they strolled, a friendly gesture.
One rainy day they could not take their usual walk. He met her in the
hallway as she was entering her room; for the first time, she invited him in.
She seemed relaxed, and Valmont sat near her on a sofa. He talked of his
love for her. She gave the faintest protest. He took her hand; she left it
there and leaned against his arm. Her voice trembled. She looked at him,
and he felt his heart flutter—it was a tender, loving look. She started to
speak—"Well! yes, I . . ."—then suddenly collapsed into his arms, crying. It
was a moment of weakness, yet Valmont held himself back. Her crying be-
came convulsive; she begged him to help her, to leave the room before
something terrible happened. He did so. The following morning he awoke
to some surprising news: in the middle of the night, claiming she was feel-
ing ill, Tourvel had suddenly left the château and returned home.
Valmont did not follow her to Paris. Instead he began staying up late,
and using no powder to hide the peaked looks that soon ensued. He went
to the chapel every day, and dragged himself despondently around the
château. He knew that his hostess would be writing to the Présidente, who
would hear of his sad state. Next he wrote to a church father in Paris, and
asked him to pass along a message to Tourvel: he was ready to change his
life for good. He wanted one last meeting, to say goodbye and to return the
letters she had written him over the last few months. The father arranged aIt afforded, moreover,
another advantage: that of
observing at my leisure her
charming face, more
beautiful than ever, as it
proffered the powerful
enticement of tears. My
blood was on fire, and I
was so little in control of
myself that I was tempted
to make the most of the
occasion. • How weak we
must be, how strong the
dominion of circumstance,
if even I, without a
thought for my plans, could
risk losing all the charm of
a prolonged struggle, all the
fascination of a laboriously
administered defeat, by
concluding a premature
victory; if distracted by the
most puerile of desires, I
could be willing that the
conqueror of Madame de
Tourvel should take
nothing for the fruit of his
labors but the tasteless
distinction of having added
one more name to the roll.
Ah, let her surrender, but
let her fight! Let her be too
weak to prevail but strong
enough to resist; let her
savor the knowledge of her
weakness at her leisure, but
let her be unwilling to
admit defeat. Leave the
407
