xxiv • Preface
pliant, fluid, like life itself. Seduction is a form of deception, but people
want to be led astray, they yearn to be seduced. If they didn't, seducers
would not find so many willing victims. Get rid of any moralizing tenden-
cies, adopt the seducer's playful philosophy, and you will find the rest of the
process easy and natural.
The Art of Seduction is designed to arm you with weapons of persuasion and
charm, so that those around you will slowly lose their ability to resist with-
out knowing how or why it has happened. It is an art of war for delicate
times.
Every seduction has two elements that you must analyze and under-
stand: first, yourself and what is seductive about you; and second, your tar-
get and the actions that will penetrate their defenses and create surrender.
The two sides are equally important. If you strategize without paying at-
tention to the parts of your character that draw people to you, you will be
seen as a mechanical seducer, slimy and manipulative. If you rely on your
seductive personality without paying attention to the other person, you will
make terrible mistakes and limit your potential.
Consequently, The Art of Seduction is divided into two parts. The first
half, "The Seductive Character," describes the nine types of seducer, plus
the Anti-Seducer. Studying these types will make you aware of what is
inherently seductive in your character, the basic building block of any se-
duction. The second half, "The Seductive Process," includes the twenty-
four maneuvers and strategies that will instruct you on how to create a
spell, break down people's resistance, give movement and force to your
seduction, and induce surrender in your target. As a kind of bridge be-
tween the two parts, there is a chapter on the eighteen types of victims of a
seduction—each of them missing something from their lives, each cradling
an emptiness you can fill. Knowing what type you are dealing with will
help you put into practice the ideas in both sections. Ignore any part of this
book and you will be an incomplete seducer.
The ideas and strategies in The Art of Seduction are based on the writings
and historical accounts of the most successful seducers in history. The
sources include the seducers' own memoirs (by Casanova, Errol Flynn, Na-
talie Barney, Marilyn Monroe); biographies (of Cleopatra, Josephine Bona-
parte, John F. Kennedy, Duke Ellington); handbooks on the subject (most
notably Ovid's Art of Love); and fictional accounts of seductions (Choderlos
de Laclos's Dangerous Liaisons, Søren Kierkegaard's The Seducer's Diary,
Murasaki Shikibu's The Tale of Genji). The heroes and heroines of these lit-
erary works are generally modeled on real-life seducers. The strategies they
employ reveal the intimate connection between fiction and seduction, cre-
ating illusion and leading a person along. In putting the book's lessons into
practice, you will be following in the path of the greatest masters of the art.
Finally, the spirit that will make you a consummate seducer is the spirit
in which you should read this book. The French writer Denis Diderot
once wrote, "I give my mind the liberty to follow the first wise or foolishShould anyone here in
Rome lack finesse at love-
making, \ Let him \ Try
me—read my book, and
results are guaranteed! \
Technique is the secret.
Charioteer, sailor,
oarsman, \ All need it.
Technique can control \
Love himself.
—OVID, THE ART OF LOVE,
TRANSLATED BY PETER GREEN
Preface • xxv
idea that presents itself, just as in the avenue de Foy our dissolute youths
follow close on the heels of some strumpet, then leave her to pursue an-
other, attacking all of them and attaching themselves to none. My thoughts
are my strumpets." He meant that he let himself be seduced by ideas, fol-
lowing whichever one caught his fancy until a better one came along, his
thoughts infused with a kind of sexual excitement. Once you enter these
pages, do as Diderot advised: let yourself be lured by the stories and ideas,
your mind open and your thoughts fluid. Slowly you will find yourself ab-
sorbing the poison through the skin and you will begin to see everything as
a seduction, including the way you think and how you look at the world.
Most virtue is a demand for greater seduction.
—NATALIE BARNEY
