38 • The Art of Seduction
to be his next conquest. You may not have to go to as much trouble or risk,
but you will always be rewarded for actions that reveal a sense of self-
sacrifice or devotion.
The embodiment of the Ideal Lover for the 1920s was Rudolph Valen-
tino, or at least the image created of him in film. Everything he did—the
gifts, the flowers, the dancing, the way he took a woman's hand—showed a
scrupulous attention to the details that would signify how much he was
thinking of her. The image was of a man who made courtship take time,
transforming it into an aesthetic experience. Men hated Valentino, because
women now expected them to match the ideal of patience and attentive-
ness that he represented. Yet nothing is more seductive than patient atten-
tiveness. It makes the affair seem lofty, aesthetic, not really about sex. The
power of a Valentino, particularly nowadays, is that people like this are so
rare. The art of playing to a woman's ideal has almost disappeared—which
only makes it that much more alluring.
If the chivalrous lover remains the ideal for women, men often idealize
the Madonna/whore, a woman who combines sensuality with an air of
spirituality or innocence. Think of the great courtesans of the Italian Re-
naissance, such as Tullia d'Aragona—essentially a prostitute, like all courte-
sans, but able to disguise her social role by establishing a reputation as a poet
and philosopher. Tullia was what was then known as an "honest courtesan."
Honest courtesans would go to church, but they had an ulterior motive: for
men, their presence at Mass was exciting. Their houses were pleasure
palaces, but what made these homes so visually delightful was their art-
works and shelves full of books, volumes of Petrarch and Dante. For the
man, the thrill, the fantasy, was to sleep with a woman who was sexual yet
had the ideal qualities of a mother and the spirit and intellect of an artist.
Where the pure prostitute excited desire but also disgust, the honest cour-
tesan made sex seem elevated and innocent, as if it were happening in the
Garden of Eden. Such women held immense power over men. To this day
they remain an ideal, if for no other reason than that they offer such a range
of pleasures. The key is ambiguity—to combine the appearance of sensi-
tivity to the pleasures of the flesh with an air of innocence, spirituality, a
poetic sensibility. This mix of the high and the low is immensely seductive.
The dynamics of the Ideal Lover have limitless possibilities, not all of
them erotic. In politics, Talleyrand essentially played the role of the Ideal
Lover with Napoleon, whose ideal in both a cabinet minister and a friend
was a man who was aristocratic, smooth with the ladies—all the things that
Napoleon himself was not. In 1798, when Talleyrand was the French for-
eign minister, he hosted a party in Napoleon's honor after the great gen-
eral's dazzling military victories in Italy. To the day Napoleon died, he
remembered this party as the best he had ever attended. It was a lavish af-
fair, and Talleyrand wove a subtle message into it by placing Roman busts
around the house, and by talking to Napoleon of reviving the imperial glo-
ries of ancient Rome. This sparked a glint in the leader's eye, and indeed, a
few years later, Napoleon gave himself the title of emperor—a move that
The Ideal Lover • 39
only made Talleyrand more powerful. The key to Talleyrand's power was
his ability to fathom Napoleon's secret ideal: his desire to be an emperor, a
dictator. Talleyrand simply held up a mirror to Napoleon and let him
glimpse that possibility. People are always vulnerable to insinuations like
this, which stroke their vanity, almost everyone's weak spot. Hint at some-
thing for them to aspire to, reveal your faith in some untapped potential
you see in them, and you will soon have them eating out of your hand.
If Ideal Lovers are masters at seducing people by appealing to their
higher selves, to something lost from their childhood, politicians can bene-
fit by applying this skill on a mass scale, to an entire electorate. This was
what John F. Kennedy quite deliberately did with the American public,
most obviously in creating the "Camelot" aura around himself. The word
"Camelot" was applied to his presidency only after his death, but the ro-
mance he consciously projected through his youth and good looks was fully
functioning during his lifetime. More subtly, he also played with America's
images of its own greatness and lost ideals. Many Americans felt that with
the wealth and comfort of the late 1950s had come great losses; ease and
conformity had buried the country's pioneer spirit. Kennedy appealed to
those lost ideals through the imagery of the New Frontier, which was ex-
emplified by the space race. The American instinct for adventure could
find outlets here, even if most of them were symbolic. And there were
other calls for public service, such as the creation of the Peace Corps.
Through appeals like these, Kennedy resparked the uniting sense of mission
that had gone missing in America during the years since World War II. He
also attracted to himself a more emotional response than presidents com-
monly got. People literally fell in love with him and the image.
Politicians can gain seductive power by digging into a country's past,
bringing images and ideals that have been abandoned or repressed back to
the surface. They only need the symbol; they do not really have to worry
about re-creating the reality behind it. The good feelings they stir up are
enough to ensure a positive response.
Symbol: The
Portrait Painter. Under his eye, all of
your physical imperfections disappear. He brings
out noble qualities in you, frames you in a myth, makes
you godlike, immortalizes you. For his ability to create
such fantasies, he is rewarded with great power.
