112 • The Art of Seduction
Most of us live in a semi-somnambulistic state: we do our daily tasks and
the days fly by. The two exceptions to this are childhood and those mo-
ments when we are in love. In both cases, our emotions are more engaged,
more open and active. And we equate feeling emotional with feeling more
alive. A public figure who can affect people's emotions, who can make
them feel communal sadness, joy, or hope, has a similar effect. An appeal to
the emotions is far more powerful than an appeal to reason.
Eva Perón knew this power early on, as a radio actress. Her tremulous
voice could make audiences weep; because of this, people saw in her great
charisma. She never forgot the experience. Her every public act was framed
in dramatic and religious motifs. Drama is condensed emotion, and the
Catholic religion is a force that reaches into your childhood, hits you where
you cannot help yourself. Evita's uplifted arms, her staged acts of charity,
her sacrifices for the common folk—all this went straight to the heart. It
was not her goodness alone that was charismatic, although the appear-
ance of goodness is alluring enough. It was her ability to dramatize her
goodness.
You must learn to exploit the two great purveyors of emotion: drama
and religion. Drama cuts out the useless and banal in life, focusing on mo-
ments of pity and terror; religion deals with matters of life and death.
Make your charitable actions dramatic, give your loving words religious
import, bathe everything in rituals and myths going back to childhood.
Caught up in the emotions you stir, people will see over your head the halo
of charisma.
The deliverer. In Harlem in the early 1950s, few African-Americans knew
much about the Nation of Islam, or ever stepped into its temple. The Na-
tion preached that white people were descended from the devil and that
someday Allah would liberate the black race. This doctrine had little mean-
ing for Harlemites, who went to church for spiritual solace and turned in
practical matters to their local politicians. But in 1954, a new minister for
the Nation of Islam arrived in Harlem.
The minister's name was Malcolm X, and he was well-read and elo-
quent, yet his gestures and words were angry. Word spread: whites had
lynched Malcolm's father. He had grown up in a juvenile facility, then had
survived as a small-time hustler before being arrested for burglary and
spending six years in prison. His short life (he was only twenty—nine at the
time) had been one long run-in with the law, yet look at him now—so
confident and educated. No one had helped him; he had done it all on his
own. Harlemites began to see Malcolm X everywhere, handing out fliers,
addressing the young. He would stand outside their churches, and as the
congregation dispersed, he would point to the preacher and say, "He repre-
sents the white man's god; I represent the black man's god." The curious
began to come to hear him preach at a Nation of Islam temple. He would
ask them to look at the actual conditions of their lives: "When you get
The Charismatic • 113
through looking at where you live, then . . . take a walk across Central
Park," he would tell them. "Look at the white man's apartments. Look
at his Wall Street!" His words were powerful, particularly coming from a
minister.
In 1957, a young Muslim in Harlem witnessed the beating of a
drunken black man by several policemen. When the Muslim protested, the
police pummeled him senseless and carted him off to jail. An angry crowd
gathered outside the police station, ready to riot. Told that only Malcolm X
could forestall violence, the police commissioner brought him in and told
him to break up the mob. Malcolm refused. Speaking more temperately,
the commissioner begged him to reconsider. Malcolm calmly set conditions
for his cooperation: medical care for the beaten Muslim, and proper
punishment for the police officers. The commissioner reluctantly agreed.
Outside the station, Malcolm explained the agreement and the crowd
dispersed. In Harlem and around the country, he was an overnight hero—
finally a man who took action. Membership in his temple soared.
Malcolm began to speak all over the United States. He never read from
a text; looking out at the audience, he made eye contact, pointed his finger.
His anger was obvious, not so much in his tone—he was always controlled
and articulate—as in his fierce energy, the veins popping out on his neck.
Many earlier black leaders had used cautious words, and had asked their fol-
lowers to deal patiently and politely with their social lot, no matter how
unfair. What a relief Malcolm was. He ridiculed the racists, he ridiculed
the liberals, he ridiculed the president; no white person escaped his scorn.
If whites were violent, Malcolm said, the language of violence should be
spoken back to them, for it was the only language they understood. "Hos-
tility is good!" he cried out. "It's been bottled up too long." In response to
the growing popularity of the nonviolent leader Martin Luther King, Jr.,
Malcolm said, "Anybody can sit. An old woman can sit. A coward can
sit. ... It takes a man to stand."
Malcolm X had a bracing effect on many who felt the same anger he
did but were frightened to express it. At his funeral—he was assassinated in
1965, at one of his speeches—the actor Ossie Davis delivered the eulogy
before a large and emotional crowd: "Malcolm," he said, "was our own
black shining prince."
Malcolm X was a Charismatic of Moses' kind: he was a deliverer. The
power of this sort of Charismatic comes from his or her expression of dark
emotions that have built up over years of oppression. In doing so, the deliv-
erer provides an opportunity for the release of bottled-up emotions by
other people—of the hostility masked by forced politeness and smiles. De-
liverers have to be one of the suffering crowd, only more so: their pain
must be exemplary. Malcolm's personal history was an integral part of his
charisma. His lesson—that blacks should help themselves, not wait for
whites to lift them up—meant a great deal more because of his own years
in prison, and because he had followed his own doctrine by educating him-
