272 • The Art of Seduction
Therefore in my view when the courtier wishes to declare
his love he should do so by his actions rather than by
speech, for a man's feelings are sometimes more clearly re-
vealed by ... a gesture of respect or a certain shyness than
by volumes of words.
—BALDASSARE CASTIGLIONE
Keys to Seduction
When we were children, our senses were much more active. The col-
ors of a new toy, or a spectacle such as a circus, held us in thrall; a
smell or a sound could fascinate us. In the games we created, many of them
reproducing something in the adult world on a smaller scale, what pleasure
we took in orchestrating every detail. We noticed everything.
As we grow older our senses get dulled. We no longer notice as much,
for we are constantly hurrying to get things done, to move on to the next
task. In seduction, you are always trying to bring the target back to the
golden moments of childhood. A child is less rational, more easily de-
ceived. A child is also more attuned to the pleasures of the senses. So when
your targets are with you, you must never give them the feeling they nor-
mally get in the real world, where we are all rushed, ruthless, out for our-
selves. You need to deliberately slow things down, and return them to the
simpler times of their youth. The details that you orchestrate—colors, gifts,
little ceremonies—are aimed at their senses, at the childish delight we take
in the immediate charms of the natural world. Their senses filled with de-
lightful things, they grow less capable of reason and rationality. Pay atten-
tion to detail and you will find yourself assuming a slower pace; your targets
will not focus on what you might be after (sexual favors, power, etc.) be-
cause you seem so considerate, so attentive. In the childish realm of the
senses in which you envelop them, they get a clear sense that you are in-
volving them in something distinct from the real world—an essential ingre-
dient of seduction. Remember: the more you get people to focus on the
little things, the less they will notice your larger direction. The seduction
will assume the slow, hypnotic pace of a ritual, in which the details have a
heightened importance and the moments are full of ceremony.
In eighth-century China, Emperor Ming Huang caught a glimpse of a
beautiful young woman, combing her hair beside an imperial pool. Her
name was Yang Kuei-fei, and even though she was the concubine of the
emperor's son, he had to have her for himself. Since he was emperor, no-
body could stop him. The emperor was a practical man—he had many
concubines, and they all had their charms, but he had never lost his head
over a woman. Yang Kuei-fei, though, was different. Her body exuded the
most wonderful fragrance. She wore gowns made of the sheerest silk gauze,
each embroidered with different flowers, depending on the season. In
walking she seemed to float, her tiny steps invisible beneath her gown. Shesurprised that Black Jade
did not take offense at
what seemed to her a crude
joke. • As Black Jade
thought over the signif-
icance of the handkerchiefs
she was happy and sad by
turns: happy because Pao-
yu read her innermost
thoughts and sad because
she wondered if what was
uppermost in her thoughts
would ever be fulfilled.
Thinking thus to herself of
the future and of the past,
she could not fall asleep.
Despite Purple Cuckoo's
remonstrances, she had her
lamp relit and began to
compose a series of
quatrains, writing them
directly on the
handkerchiefs which
Pao-yu had sent.
—TSAO HSUEH CHIN,
DREAM OF THE RED CHAMBER,
TRANSLATED BY CHI-CHEN
WANG
Pay Attention to Detail • 273
danced to perfection, wrote songs in his honor that she sang magnificently,
had a way of looking at him that made his blood boil with desire. She
quickly became his favorite.
Yang Kuei-fei drove the emperor to distraction. He built palaces for her,
spent all his time with her, satisfied her every whim. Before long his king-
dom was bankrupt and ruined. Yang Kuei-fei was an artful seductress who
had a devastating effect on all of the men who crossed her path. There were
so many ways her presence charmed—the scents, the voice, the movements,
the witty conversation, the artful glances, the embroidered gowns. These
pleasurable details turned a mighty king into a distracted baby.
Since time immemorial, women have known that within the most ap-
parently self-possessed man is an animal whom they can lead by filling his
senses with the proper physical lures. The key is to attack on as many fronts
as possible. Do not ignore your voice, your gestures, your walk, your
clothes, your glances. Some of the most alluring women in history have so
distracted their victims with sensual detail that the men fail to notice it is all
an illusion.
From the 1940s on into the early 1960s, Pamela Churchill Harriman
had a series of affairs with some of the most prominent and wealthy men in
the world—Averill Harriman (whom years later she married), Gianni Agnelli
(heir to the Fiat fortune), Baron Elie de Rothschild. What attracted these
men, and kept them in thrall, was not her beauty or her lineage or her viva-
cious personality, but her extraordinary attention to detail. It began with
her attentive look as she listened to your every word, soaking up your
tastes. Once she found her way into your home, she would fill it with your
favorite flowers, get your chef to cook that dish you had tasted only in the
finest restaurants. You mentioned an artist you liked? A few days later that
artist would be attending one of your parties. She found the perfect an-
tiques for you, dressed in the way that most pleased or excited you, and she
did this without your saying a word—she spied, gathered information from
third parties, overheard you talking to someone else. Harriman's attention
to detail had an intoxicating effect on all the men in her life. It had some-
thing in common with the pampering of a mother, there to bring order
and comfort into their lives, attending to their needs. Life is harsh and
competitive. Attending to detail in a way that is soothing to the other per-
son makes them dependent upon you. The key is probing their needs in a
way that is not too obvious, so that when you make precisely the right ges-
ture, it seems uncanny, as if you had read their mind. This is another way of
returning your targets to childhood, when all of their needs were met.
In the eyes of women all over the world, Rudolph Valentino reigned
as the Great Lover through much of the 1920s. The qualities behind his
appeal certainly included his handsome, almost pretty face, his dancing
skills, the strangely exciting streak of cruelty in his manner. But his perhaps
most endearing trait was his time-consuming approach to courtship. His
films would show him seducing a woman slowly, with careful details—
sending her flowers (choosing the variety to match the mood he wanted to
