100 • The Art of Seduction
catchwords, slogans, rhythmic repetitions, phrases for the audience to re-
peat—can easily be acquired. Roosevelt, a calm, patrician type, was able to
make himself a dynamic speaker, both through his style of delivery, which
was slow and hypnotic, and through his brilliant use of imagery, allitera-
tion, and biblical rhetoric. The crowds at his rallies were often moved to
tears. The slow, authoritative style is often more effective than passion in
the long run, for it is more subtly spellbinding, and less tiring.
Theatricality. A Charismatic is larger than life, has extra presence. Actors
have studied this kind of presence for centuries; they know how to stand
on a crowded stage and command attention. Surprisingly, it is not the actor
who screams the loudest or gestures the most wildly who works this magic
best, but the actor who stays calm, radiating self-assurance. The effect is
ruined by trying too hard. It is essential to be self-aware, to have the ability
to see yourself as others see you. De Gaulle understood that self-awareness
was key to his charisma; in the most turbulent circumstances—the Nazi
occupation of France, the national reconstruction after World War II,
an army rebellion in Algeria—he retained an Olympian composure that
played beautifully against the hysteria of his colleagues. When he spoke, no
one could take their eyes off him. Once you know how to command at-
tention this way, heighten the effect by appearing in ceremonial and ritual
events that are full of exciting imagery, making you look regal and godlike.
Flamboyancy has nothing to do with charisma—it attracts the wrong kind
of attention.
Uninhibitedness. Most people are repressed, and have little access to their
unconscious—a problem that creates opportunities for the Charismatic,
who can become a kind of screen on which others project their secret fan-
tasies and longings. You will first have to show that you are less inhibited
than your audience—that you radiate a dangerous sexuality, have no fear of
death, are delightfully spontaneous. Even a hint of these qualities will make
people think you more powerful than you are. In the 1850s a bohemian
American actress, Adah Isaacs Menken, took the world by storm through
her unbridled sexual energy, and her fearlessness. She would appear on
stage half-naked, performing death-defying acts; few women could dare
such things in the Victorian period, and a rather mediocre actress became a
figure of cultlike adoration.
An extension of your being uninhibited is a dreamlike quality in your
work and character that reveals your openness to your unconscious. It was
the possession of this quality that transformed artists like Wagner and Pi-
casso into charismatic idols. Its cousin is a fluidity of body and spirit; while
the repressed are rigid, Charismatics have an ease and an adaptability that
show their openness to experience.
The Charismatic • 101
Fervency. You need to believe in something, and to believe in it strongly
enough for it to animate all your gestures and make your eyes light up. This
cannot be faked. Politicians inevitably lie to the public; what distinguishes
Charismatics is that they believe their own lies, which makes them that
much more believable. A prerequisite for fiery belief is some great cause to
rally around—a crusade. Become the rallying point for people's discontent,
and show that you share none of the doubts that plague normal humans. In
1490, the Florentine Girolamo Savonarola railed at the immorality of the
pope and the Catholic Church. Claiming to be divinely inspired, he be-
came so animated during his sermons that hysteria would sweep the crowd.
Savonarola developed such a following that he briefly took over the city,
until the pope had him captured and burned at the stake. People believed in
him because of the depth of his conviction. His example has more rele-
vance today than ever: people are more and more isolated, and long for
communal experience. Let your own fervent and contagious faith, in virtu-
ally anything, give them something to believe in.
Vulnerability. Charismatics display a need for love and affection. They are
open to their audience, and in fact feed off its energy; the audience in turn
is electrified by the Charismatic, the current increasing as it passes back and
forth. This vulnerable side to charisma softens the self-confident side,
which can seem fanatical and frightening.
Since charisma involves feelings akin to love, you in turn must reveal
your love for your followers. This was a key component to the charisma
that Marilyn Monroe radiated on camera. "I knew I belonged to the Pub-
lic," she wrote in her diary, "and to the world, not because I was talented or
even beautiful but because I had never belonged to anything or anyone else.
The Public was the only family, the only Prince Charming and the only
home I had ever dreamed of." In front of a camera, Monroe suddenly came
to life, flirting with and exciting her unseen public. If the audience does
not sense this quality in you they will turn away from you. On the other
hand, you must never seem manipulative or needy. Imagine your public as a
single person whom you are trying to seduce—nothing is more seductive
to people than the feeling that they are desired.
Adventurousness. Charismatics are unconventional. They have an air of
adventure and risk that attracts the bored. Be brazen and courageous in
your actions—be seen taking risks for the good of others. Napoleon made
sure his soldiers saw him at the cannons in battle. Lenin walked openly on
the streets, despite the death threats he had received. Charismatics thrive in
troubled waters; a crisis situation allows them to flaunt their daring, which
enhances their aura. John F. Kennedy came to life in dealing with the
Cuban missile crisis, Charles de Gaulle when he confronted rebellion in
