
The Feminine Dandy
When the eighteen-year-old Rodolpho Guglielmi emigrated from
Italy to the United States in 1913, he came with no particular skills
apart from his good looks and his dancing prowess. To put these qualities to
advantage, he found work in the thes dansants, the Manhattan dance halls
where young girls would go alone or with friends and hire a taxi dancer for
a brief thrill. The taxi dancer would expertly twirl them around the dance
floor, flirting and chatting, all for a small fee. Guglielmi soon made a name
as one of the best—so graceful, poised, and pretty.
In working as a taxi dancer, Guglielmi spent a great deal of time around
women. He quickly learned what pleased them—how to mirror them in
subtle ways, how to put them at ease (but not too much). He began to pay
attention to his clothes, creating his own dapper look: he danced with a
corset under his shirt to give himself a trim figure, sported a wristwatch
(considered effeminate in those days), and claimed to be a marquis. In 1915,
he landed a job demonstrating the tango in fancy restaurants, and changed
his name to the more evocative Rodolpho di Valentina. A year later he
moved to Los Angeles: he wanted to try to make it in Hollywood.
Now known as Rudolph Valentino, Guglielmi appeared as an extra in
several low-budget pictures. He eventually landed a somewhat larger role in
the 1919 film Eyes of Youth, in which he played a seducer, and caught
women's attention by how different a seducer he was: his movements were
graceful and delicate, his skin so smooth and his face so pretty that when
he swooped down on his victim and drowned her protests with a kiss, he
seemed more thrilling than sinister. Next came The Four Horsemen of the
Apocalypse, in which Valentino played the male lead, Julio the playboy, and
became an overnight sex symbol through a tango sequence in which he se-
duced a young woman by leading her through the dance. The scene encap-
sulated the essence of his appeal: his feet smooth and fluid, his poise almost
feminine, combined with an air of control. Female members of the audi-
ence literally swooned as he raised a married woman's hands to his lips, or
shared the fragrance of a rose with his lover. He seemed so much more at-
tentive to women than other men did; but mixed in with this delicacy was
a hint of cruelty and menace that drove women wild.
In his most famous film, The Sheik, Valentino played an Arab prince
(later revealed to be a Scottish lord abandoned in the Sahara as a baby) who
rescues a proud English lady in the desert, then conquers her in a mannerOnce a son was born to
Mercury and the goddess
Venus, and he was brought
up by the naiads in Ida's
caves. In his features, it
was easy to trace
resemblance to his father
and to his mother. He was
called after them, too, for
his name was
Hermaphroditus. As soon
as he was fifteen, he left
his native hills, and Ida
where he had been brought
up, and for the sheer joy of
travelling visited remote
places. . . .He went as far
as the cities of Lycia, and
on to the Carians, who
dwell nearby. In this region
he spied a pool of water, so
clear that he could see right
to the bottom. . . . The
water was like crystal, and
the edges of the pool were
ringed with fresh turf and
grass that was always
green. A nymph
[Salmacis] dwelt
there. . . . Often she would
gather flowers, and it so
happened that she was
engaged in this pastime
when she caught sight of
the boy, Hermaphroditus.
As soon as she had seen
him, she longed to possess
him. . . .She addressed
him: "Fair boy, you surely
deserve to be thought a
43
