12 • The Art of Seduction
tion, and offered him the variety and the chase that he craved. Without any
outlets, his drives turn inward and gnaw at him, becoming all the more
volatile for being repressed. Sometimes a powerful man will do the most ir-
rational things, have an affair when it is least called for, just for a thrill, the
danger of it all. The irrational can prove immensely seductive, even more
so for men, who must always seem so reasonable.
If it is seductive power you are after, the Siren is the most potent of all.
She operates on a man's most basic emotions, and if she plays her role prop-
erly, she can transform a normally strong and responsible male into a child-
ish slave. The Siren operates well on the rigid masculine type—the soldier
or hero—just as Cleopatra overwhelmed Mark Antony and Marilyn Mon-
roe Joe DiMaggio. But never imagine that these are the only types the
Siren can affect. Julius Caesar was a writer and thinker, who had transferred
his intellectual abilities onto the battlefield and into the political arena; the
playwright Arthur Miller fell as deeply under Monroe's spell as DiMaggio.
The intellectual is often the one most susceptible to the Siren call of pure
physical pleasure, because his life so lacks it. The Siren does not have to
worry about finding the right victim. Her magic works on one and all.
First and foremost, a Siren must distinguish herself from other women.
She is by nature a rare thing, mythic, only one to a group; she is also a valu-
able prize to be wrested away from other men. Cleopatra made herself dif-
ferent through her sense of high drama; the Empress Josephine Bonaparte's
device was her extreme languorousness; Marilyn Monroe's was her little-
girl quality. Physicality offers the best opportunities here, since a Siren is
preeminently a sight to behold. A highly feminine and sexual presence,
even to the point of caricature, will quickly differentiate you, since most
women lack the confidence to project such an image.
Once the Siren has made herself stand out from others, she must have
two other critical qualities: the ability to get the male to pursue her so
feverishly that he loses control; and a touch of the dangerous. Danger is
surprisingly seductive. To get the male to pursue you is relatively simple: a
highly sexual presence will do this quite well. But you must not resemble a
courtesan or whore, whom the male may pursue only to quickly lose inter-
est in her. Instead, you are slightly elusive and distant, a fantasy come to life.
During the Renaissance, the great Sirens, such as Tullia d'Aragona, would
act and look like Grecian goddesses—the fantasy of the day. Today you
might model yourself on a film goddess—anything that seems larger than
life, even awe inspiring. These qualities will make a man chase you vehe-
mently, and the more he chases, the more he will feel that he is acting on
his own initiative. This is an excellent way of disguising how deeply you
are manipulating him.
The notion of danger, challenge, sometimes death, might seem out-
dated, but danger is critical in seduction. It adds emotional spice and is
particularly appealing to men today, who are normally so rational and re-
pressed. Danger is present in the original myth of the Siren. In Homer's
Odyssey, the hero Odysseus must sail by the rocks where the Sirens, strangeTo whom aw I compare
the lovely girl, so blessed by
fortune, if not to the
Sirens, who with their
lodestone draw the ships
towards them? Thus, I
imagine, did Isolde attract
many thoughts and hearts
that deemed themselves
safe from love's
disquietude. And indeed
these two—anchorless
ships and stray thoughts—
provide a good comparison.
They are both so seldom
on a straight course, lie so
often in unsure havens,
pitching and tossing and
heaving to and fro. Just so,
in the same way, do
aimless desire and random
love-longing drift like an
anchorless ship. This
charming young princess,
discreet and courteous
Isolde, drew thoughts from
the hearts that enshrined
them as a lodestone draws
in ships to the sound of the
Sirens' song. She sang
openly and secretly, in
through ears and eyes to
where many a heart was
stirred. The song which she
sang openly in this and
other places was her own
sweet singing and soft
sounding of strings that
echoed for all to hear
through the kingdom of the
ears deep down into the
heart. But her secret song
was her wondrous beauty
that stole with its rapturous
music hidden and unseen
through the windows of the
eyes into many noble
hearts and smoothed on the
magic which took thoughts
prisoner suddenly, and,
taking them, fettered them
with desire!
—GOTTFRIED VON STRASSBURG,
TRISTAN, TRANSLATED BY
A.T. HATTO
The Siren • 13
female creatures, sing and beckon sailors to their destruction. They sing of
the glories of the past, of a world like childhood, without responsibilities, a
world of pure pleasure. Their voices are like water, liquid and inviting.
Sailors would leap into the water to join them, and drown; or, distracted
and entranced, they would steer their ship into the rocks. To protect his
sailors from the Sirens, Odysseus has their ears filled with wax; he himself is
tied to the mast, so he can both hear the Sirens and live to tell of it—a
strange desire, since the thrill of the Sirens is giving in to the temptation to
follow them.
Just as the ancient sailors had to row and steer, ignoring all distractions,
a man today must work and follow a straight path in life. The call of some-
thing dangerous, emotional, unknown is all the more powerful because it is
so forbidden. Think of the victims of the great Sirens of history: Paris
causes a war for the sake of Helen of Troy, Caesar risks an empire and
Antony loses his power and his life for Cleopatra, Napoleon becomes a
laughingstock over Josephine, DiMaggio never gets over Marilyn, and
Arthur Miller can't write for years. A man is often ruined by a Siren, yet
cannot tear himself away. (Many powerful men have a masochistic streak.)
An element of danger is easy to hint at, and will enhance your other Siren
characteristics—the touch of madness in Marilyn, for example, that pulled
men in. Sirens are often fantastically irrational, which is immensely attrac-
tive to men who are oppressed by their own reasonableness. An element of
fear is also critical: keeping a man at a proper distance creates respect, so
that he doesn't get close enough to see through you or notice your weaker
qualities. Create such fear by suddenly changing your moods, keeping the
man off balance, occasionally intimidating him with capricious behavior.
The most important element for an aspiring Siren is always the physical,
the Siren's main instrument of power. Physical qualities—a scent, a height-
ened femininity evoked through makeup or through elaborate or seductive
clothing—act all the more powerfully on men because they have no mean-
ing. In their immediacy they bypass rational processes, having the same ef-
fect that a decoy has on an animal, or the movement of a cape on a bull.
The proper Siren appearance is often confused with physical beauty, par-
ticularly the face. But a beautiful face does not a Siren make: instead it cre-
ates too much distance and coldness. (Neither Cleopatra nor Marilyn
Monroe, the two greatest Sirens in history, were known for their beautiful
faces.) Although a smile and an inviting look are infinitely seductive, they
must never dominate your appearance. They are too obvious and direct.
The Siren must stimulate a generalized desire, and the best way to do this is
by creating an overall impression that is both distracting and alluring. It is
not one particular trait, but a combination of qualities:
The voice. Clearly a critical quality, as the legend indicates, the Siren's
voice has an immediate animal presence with incredible suggestive power.
Perhaps that power is regressive, recalling the ability of the mother's voiceFalling in love with statues
and paintings, even
making love to them is an
ancient fantasy, one of
which the Renaissance was
keenly aware. Giorgio
Vasari, writing in the
introductory section of the
Lives about art in
antiquity, tells how men
violated the laws, going
into the temples at night
and making love with
statues of Venus. In the
morning, priests would
enter the sanctuaries to find
stains on the marble
figures.
—LYNNE LAWNER,
LIVES OF THE COURTESANS
