300 • The Art of Seduction
Asian woman) while enveloping his past and indeed their whole experience
in titillating bits of history. As Bouriscout later explained, "Pei Pu screwed
me in the head. ... I was having relations and in my thoughts, my dreams,
I was light-years away from what was true."
Bouriscout thought he was having an exotic adventure, an enduring
fantasy of his. Less consciously, he had an outlet for his repressed homo-
sexuality. Pei Pu embodied his fantasy, giving it flesh, by working first on
his mind. The mind has two currents: it wants to believe in things that are
pleasant to believe in, yet it has a self-protective need to be suspicious of
people. If you start off too theatrical, trying too hard to create a fantasy,
you will feed that suspicious side of the mind, and once fed, the doubts will
not go away. Instead, you must start slowly, building trust, while perhaps
letting people see a little touch of something strange or exciting about you
to tease their interest. Then you build up your story, like any piece of fic-
tion. You have established a foundation of trust—now the fantasies and
dreams you envelop them in are suddenly believable.
Remember: people want to believe in the extraordinary; with a little
groundwork, a little mental foreplay, they will fall for your illusion. If any-
thing, err on the side of reality: use real props (like the child Pei Pu showed
Bouriscout) and add the fantastical touches in your words, or an occasional
gesture that gives you a slight unreality. Once you sense that they are
hooked, you can deepen the spell, go further and further into the fantasy.
At that point they will have gone so far into their own minds that you will
no longer have to bother with verisimilitude.
Wish Fulfillment
In 1762, Catherine, wife of Czar Peter III, staged a coup against her inef-
fectual husband and proclaimed herself empress of Russia. Over the next
few years Catherine ruled alone, but kept a series of lovers. The Russians
called these men the vremienchiki, "the men of the moment," and in 1774
the man of the moment was Gregory Potemkin, a thirty-five-year-old lieu-
tenant, ten years younger than Catherine, and a most unlikely candidate for
the role. Potemkin was coarse and not at all handsome (he had lost an eye
in an accident). But he knew how to make Catherine laugh, and he wor-
shiped her so intensely that she eventually succumbed. He quickly became
the love of her life.
Catherine promoted Potemkin higher and higher in the hierarchy,
eventually making him the governor of White Russia, a large southwestern
area including the Ukraine. As governor, Potemkin had to leave St. Peters-
burg and go to live in the south. He knew that Catherine could not do
without male companionship, so he took it upon himself to name Cather-
ine's subsequent vremienchiki. She not only approved of this arrangement,
she made it clear that Potemkin would always remain her favorite.
Catherine's dream was to start a war with Turkey, recapture Constan-when you look at her: is
that not enough? She is
the generative force of an
illusion, the birth point of
desire, the threshold of
contemplation of bodily
beauty.
—LYNNE LAWNER, LIVES OF
THE COURTESANS: PORTRAITS
OF THE RENAISSANCE
It was on March 16, the
same day the Duke of
Gloucester wrote to Sir
William, that Goethe
recorded the first known
performance of what were
destined to be called
Emma's Attitudes. Just
what these were, we shall
learn shortly. First, it must
be emphasized that the
Attitudes were a show
for favored eyes only.
• ... Goethe, disciple of
Winckelmann, was at this
date thrilled by the human
form, as a contemporary
writes. Here was the ideal
spectator for the classical
drama Emma and Sir
William had wrought in
the long winter evenings.
Let us take our seats beside
Goethe and settle to watch
the show as he describes
it. • "Sit William
Hamilton . . . has now,
after many years of
devotion to the arts and the
study of nature, found the
acme of these delights in
the person of an English
girl of twenty with a
beautiful face and a perfect
figure. He has had a
Greek costume made for
her which becomes her
extremely. Dressed in this,
he lets down her hair and,
with a few shawls, gives so
much variety to her poses,
gestures, expressions, etc.
that the spectator can
hardly believe his eyes. He
sees what thousands of
artists would have liked to
Confuse Desire and Reality—The Perfect Illusion • 301
tinople for the Orthodox Church, and drive the Turks out of Europe. She
offered to share this crusade with the young Hapsburg emperor, Joseph II,
but Joseph never quite brought himself to sign the treaty that would unite
them in war. Growing impatient, in 1783 Catherine annexed the Crimea, a
southern peninsula that was mostly populated by Muslim Tartars. She asked
Potemkin to do there what he had already managed to do in the Ukraine—
rid the area of bandits, build roads, modernize the ports, bring prosperity
to the poor. Once he had cleaned it up, the Crimea would make the per-
fect launching post for the war against Turkey
The Crimea was a backward wasteland, but Potemkin loved the chal-
lenge. Getting to work on a hundred different projects, he grew intoxicated
with visions of the miracles he would perform there. He would establish a
capital on the Dnieper River, Ekaterinoslav ("To the glory of Catherine"),
that would rival St. Petersburg and would house a university outshining
anything in Europe. The countryside would hold endless fields of corn, or-
chards with rare fruits from the Orient, silkworm farms, new towns with
bustling marketplaces. On a visit to the empress in 1785, Potemkin talked
of these things as if they already existed, so vivid were his descriptions. The
empress was delighted, but her ministers were skeptical—Potemkin loved
to talk. Ignoring their warnings, in 1787 Catherine arranged for a tour
of the area. She asked Joseph II to join her—he would be so impressed
with the modernization of the Crimea that he would immediately sign on
for the war against Turkey. Potemkin, naturally, was to organize the whole
affair.
And so, in May of that year, after the Dnieper had thawed, Catherine
prepared for a journey from Kiev, in the Ukraine, to Sebastopol, in the
Crimea. Potemkin arranged for seven floating palaces to carry Catherine
and her retinue down the river. The journey began, and as Catherine,
Joseph, and the courtiers looked at the shores to either side, they saw tri-
umphal arches in front of clean-looking towns, their walls freshly painted;
healthy-looking cattle grazing in the pastures; streams of marching troops
on the roads; buildings going up everywhere. At dusk they were enter-
tained by bright-costumed peasants, and smiling girls with flowers in their
hair, dancing on the shore. Catherine had traveled through this area many
years before, and the poverty of the peasantry there had saddened her—she
had determined then that she would somehow change their lot. To see be-
fore her eyes the signs of such a transformation overwhelmed her, and she
berated Potemkin's critics: Look at what my favorite has accomplished,
look at these miracles!
They anchored at three towns along the way, staying in each place in a
magnificent, newly built palace with artificial waterfalls in the English-style
gardens. On land they moved through villages with vibrant marketplaces;
the peasants were happily at work, building and repairing. Everywhere they
spent the night, some spectacle filled their eyes—dances, parades, mytho-
logical tableaux vivants, artificial volcanoes illuminating Moorish gardens.
Finally, at the end of the trip, in the palace at Sebastopol, Catherine andexpress realized before him
in movements and
surprising transformations—
standing, kneeling, sitting,
reclining, serious, sad,
playful, ecstatic, contrite,
alluring, threatening,
anxious, one pose follows
another without a break.
She knows how to arrange
the folds of her veil to
match each mood, and has
a hundred ways of turning
it into a headdress. The old
knight idolizes her and is
quite enthusiastic about
everything she does. In her
he has found all the
antiquities, all the profiles
of Sicilian coins, even the
Apollo Belvedere. This
much is certain: as a
performance it's like
nothing you ever saw before
in your life. We have
already enjoyed it on two
evenings."
—FLORA FRASER,
EMMA, LADY HAMILTON
For this uncanny is in
reality nothing new or
alien, but something which
is familiar and old-
established in the mind
and which has become
alienated from it only
through the process of
repression. This reference to
the factor of repression
enables us, furthermore, to
understand Schelling's
definition of the uncanny
as something which ought
to have remained hidden
but has come to light. . . .
• ... There is one more
point of general application
which I should like to add.
. . . This is that an
uncanny effect is often and
easily produced when the
distinction between
imagination and reality is
effaced, as when something
that we have hitherto
regarded as imaginary
