48 • The Art of Seduction
The seduction emanating from a person of uncertain or dis-
simulated sex is powerful.
—COLETTE
Keys to the Character
Many of us today imagine that sexual freedom has progressed in recent
years—that everything has changed, for better or worse. This is
mostly an illusion; a reading of history reveals periods of licentiousness
(imperial Rome, late-seventeenth-century England, the "floating world" of
eighteenth-century Japan) far in excess of what we are currently experi-
encing. Gender roles are certainly changing, but they have changed before.
Society is in a state of constant flux, but there is something that does not
change: the vast majority of people conform to whatever is normal for the
time. They play the role allotted to them. Conformity is a constant because
humans are social creatures who are always imitating one another. At cer-
tain points in history it may be fashionable to be different and rebellious,
but if a lot of people are playing that role, there is nothing different or re-
bellious about it.
We should never complain about most people's slavish conformity,
however, for it offers untold possibilities of power and seduction to those
who are up for a few risks. Dandies have existed in all ages and cultures (Al-
cibiades in ancient Greece, Korechika in late-tenth-century Japan), and
wherever they have gone they have thrived on the conformist role playing
of others. The Dandy displays a true and radical difference from other peo-
ple, a difference of appearance and manner. Since most of us are secretly
oppressed by our lack of freedom, we are drawn to those who are more
fluid and flaunt their difference.
Dandies seduce socially as well as sexually; groups form around them,
their style is wildly imitated, an entire court or crowd will fall in love
with them. In adapting the Dandy character for your own purposes, re-
member that the Dandy is by nature a rare and beautiful flower. Be differ-
ent in ways that are both striking and aesthetic, never vulgar; poke fun at
current trends and styles, go in a novel direction, and be supremely uninter-
ested in what anyone else is doing. Most people are insecure; they will
wonder what you are up to, and slowly they will come to admire and imi-
tate you, because you express yourself with total confidence.
The Dandy has traditionally been defined by clothing, and certainly
most Dandies create a unique visual style. Beau Brummel, the most famous
Dandy of all, would spend hours on his toilette, particularly the inimitably
styled knot in his necktie, for which he was famous throughout early-
nineteenth-century England. But a Dandy's style cannot be obvious, for
Dandies are subtle, and never try hard for attention—attention comes to
them. The person whose clothes are flagrantly different has little imagina-
tion or taste. Dandies show their difference in the little touches that markgirl, Mademoiselle
Charlotte, thrown much
into his company, fell
desperately in love with the
abbé, and when the affair
had progressed to a
liaison, the abbé asked her
how she came to be won . . .
• "I stood in no need of
caution as I should have
with a man. I saw nothing
but a beautiful woman,
and why should I be
forbidden to love you?
What advantages a
woman's dress gives you!
The heart of a man is
there, and that makes a
great impression upon us,
and on the other hand, all
the charms of the fair sex
fascinate us, and prevent us
from taking precautions. "
—C.J. BULLIET,
VENUS CASTINA
Beau Brummell was
regarded as unbalanced in
his passion for daily
ablutions. His ritualistic
morning toilet took upward
of five hours, one hour
spent inching himself into
his skin-tight buckskin
breeches, an hour with the
hairdresser and another two
hours tying and "creasing
down" a series of starched
cravats until perfection was
achieved. But first of all
two hours were spent
scrubbing himself with
fetish zeal from head to toe
in milk, water and eau de
Cologne. . . . Beau
Brummell said he used
only the froth of
champagne to polish his
Hessian boots. He had
365 snuff boxes, those
suitable for summer wear
being quite unthinkable in
winter, and the fit of his
gloves was achieved by
entrusting their cut to two
firms—one for the fingers,
the other for the thumbs.
The Dandy • 49
their disdain for convention: Théophile Gautier's red vest, Oscar Wilde's
green velvet suit, Andy Warhol's silver wigs. The great English Prime Min-
ister Benjamin Disraeli had two magnificent canes, one for morning, one
for evening; at noon he would change canes, no matter where he was. The
female Dandy works similarly. She may adopt male clothing, say, but if she
does, a touch here or there will set her truly apart: no man ever dressed
quite like George Sand. The overtall hat, the riding boots worn on the
streets of Paris, made her a sight to behold.
Remember, there must be a reference point. If your visual style is to-
tally unfamiliar, people will think you at best an obvious attention-getter, at
worst crazy. Instead, create your own fashion sense by adapting and altering
prevailing styles to make yourself an object of fascination. Do this right and
you will be wildly imitated. The Count d'Orsay, a great London dandy of
the 1830s and 1840s, was closely watched by fashionable people; one day,
caught in a sudden London rainstorm, he bought a paltrok, a kind of heavy,
hooded duffle coat, off the back of a Dutch sailor. The paltrok immediately
became the coat to wear. Having people imitate you, of course, is a sign of
your powers of seduction.
The nonconformity of Dandies, however, goes far beyond appearances.
It is an attitude toward life that sets them apart; adopt that attitude and a
circle of followers will form around you.
Dandies are supremely impudent. They don't give a damn about other
people, and never try to please. In the court of Louis XIV, the writer La
Bruyere noticed that courtiers who tried hard to please were invariably on
the way down; nothing was more anti-seductive. As Barbey d'Aurevilly
wrote, "Dandies please women by displeasing them."
Impudence was fundamental to the appeal of Oscar Wilde. In a Lon-
don theater one night, after the first performance of one of Wilde's plays,
the ecstatic audience yelled for the author to appear onstage. Wilde made
them wait and wait, then finally emerged, smoking a cigarette and wearing
an expression of total disdain. "It may be bad manners to appear here
smoking, but it is far worse to disturb me when I am smoking," he scolded
his fans. The Count d'Orsay was equally impudent. At a London club one
night, a Rothschild who was notoriously cheap accidentally dropped a gold
coin on the floor, then bent down to look for it. The count immediately
whipped out a thousand-franc note (worth much more than the coin),
rolled it up, lit it like a candle, and got down on all fours, as if to help light
the way in the search. Only a Dandy could get away with such audacity.
The insolence of the Rake is tied up with his desire to conquer a woman;
he cares for nothing else. The insolence of the Dandy, on the other hand, is
aimed at society and its conventions. It is not a woman he cares to conquer
but a whole group, an entire social world. And since people are generally
oppressed by the obligation of always being polite and self-sacrificing, they
are delighted to spend time around a person who disdains such niceties.
Dandies are masters of the art of living. They live for pleasure, not for
work; they surround themselves with beautiful objects and eat and drinkSometimes, however, the
tyranny of elegance became
altogether insupportable. A
Mr. Boothby committed
suicide and left a note
saying he could no longer
endure the ennui of
buttoning and unbuttoning.
—THE GAME OF HEARTS:
HARRIETTE WILSON'S
MEMOIRS, EDITED BY LESLEY
BLANCH
This royal manner which
[the dandy] raises to the
height of true royalty, the
dandy has taken this from
women, who alone seem
naturally made for such a
role. It is a somewhat by
using the manner and the
method of women that
the dandy dominates. And
this usurpation of
femininity, he makes
women themselves approve
of this. . . . The dandy
has something antinatural
and androgynous about
him, which is precisely how
he is able to endlessly
seduce.
—JULES LEMAÎTRE,
LES CONTEMPORAINS
