Confuse Desire and Reality—The Perfect Illusion • 305
in her house. Afterward, a handsome German officer approached her in the
garden and asked for her help in passing along a request to the emperor.
Pauline said she would do her best, and then, with a rather mysterious look
in her eye, asked him to come back to the same spot the next night. The
officer returned, and was greeted by a young woman who led him to some
rooms near the garden and then to a magnificent salon, complete with an
extravagant bath. Moments later, another young woman entered through a
side door, dressed in the sheerest garments. It was Pauline. Bells were rung,
ropes were pulled, and maids appeared, preparing the bath, giving the offi-
cer a dressing gown, then disappearing. The officer later described the eve-
ning as something out of a fairy tale, and he had the feeling that Pauline
was deliberately acting the part of some mythical seductress. Pauline was
beautiful and powerful enough to get almost any man she wanted, and she
wasn't interested simply in luring a man into bed; she wanted to envelop
him in romantic adventure, seduce his mind. Part of the adventure was the
feeling that she was playing a role, and was inviting her target along into
this shared fantasy.
Role playing is immensely pleasurable. Its appeal goes back to child-
hood, where we first learn the thrill of trying on different parts, imitating
adults or figures out of fiction. As we get older and society fixes a role on
us, a part of us yearns for the playful approach we once had, the masks we
were able to wear. We still want to play that game, to act a different role in
life. Indulge your targets in this wish by first making it clear that you are
playing a role, then inviting them to join you in a shared fantasy. The more
you set things up like a play or a piece of fiction, the better. Notice how
Pauline began the seduction with a mysterious request that the officer reap-
pear the next night; then a second woman led him into a magical series of
rooms. Pauline herself delayed her entrance, and when she appeared, she
did not mention his business with Napoleon, or anything remotely banal.
She had an ethereal air about her; he was being invited to enter a fairy
tale. The evening was real, but had an uncanny resemblance to an erotic
dream.
Casanova took role playing still further. He traveled with an enormous
wardrobe and a trunk full of props, many of them gifts for his targets—
fans, jewels, other accouterments. And some of the things he said and did
were borrowed from novels he had read and stories he had heard. He en-
veloped women in a romantic atmosphere that was heightened yet quite
real to their senses. Like Casanova, you must see the world as a kind of the-
ater. Inject a certain lightness into the roles you are playing; try to create a
sense of drama and illusion; confuse people with the slight unreality of
words and gestures inspired by fiction; in daily life, be the consummate ac-
tor. Our culture reveres actors because of their freedom to play roles. It is
something that all of us envy.
For years, the Cardinal de Rohan had been afraid that he had somehow
offended his queen, Marie Antoinette. She would not so much as look at
him. Then, in 1784, the Comtesse de Lamotte-Valois suggested to him that
306 • The Art of Seduction
the queen was prepared not only to change this situation but actually to be-
friend him. The queen, said Lamotte-Valois, would indicate this in her
next formal reception—she would nod to him in a particular way.
During the reception, Rohan indeed noticed a slight change in the
queen's behavior toward him, and a barely perceptible glance at him. He
was overjoyed. Now the countess suggested they exchange letters, and Ro-
han spent days writing and rewriting his first letter to the queen. To his de-
light he received one back. Next the queen requested a private interview
with him in the gardens of Versailles. Rohan was beside himself with hap-
piness and anxiety. At nightfall he met the queen in the gardens, fell to the
ground, and kissed the hem of her dress. "You may hope that the past will
be forgotten," she said. At this moment they heard voices approaching, and
the queen, frightened that someone would see them together, quickly fled
with her servants. But Rohan soon received a request from her, again
through the countess: she desperately wanted to acquire the most beautiful
diamond necklace ever created. She needed a go-between to purchase it for
her, since the king thought it too expensive. She had chosen Rohan for the
task. The cardinal was only too willing; in performing this task he would
prove his loyalty, and the queen would be indebted to him forever. Rohan
acquired the necklace. The countess was to deliver it to the queen. Now
Rohan waited for the queen both to thank him and slowly to pay him
back.
Yet this never happened. The countess was in fact a grand swindler; the
queen had never nodded to him, he had only imagined it. The letters
he had received from her were forgeries, and not even very good ones. The
woman he had met in the park had been a prostitute paid to dress and act
the part. The necklace was of course real, but once Rohan had paid for it,
and handed it over to the countess, it disappeared. It was broken into parts,
which were hawked all over Europe for enormous amounts. And when
Rohan finally complained to the queen, news of the extravagant purchase
spread rapidly. The public believed Rohan's story—that the queen had in-
deed bought the necklace, and was pretending otherwise. This fiction was
the first step in the ruin of her reputation.
Everyone has lost something in life, has felt the pangs of disappoint-
ment. The idea that we can get something back, that a mistake can be
righted, is immensely seductive. Under the impression that the queen was
prepared to forgive some mistake he had made, Rohan hallucinated all
kinds of things—nods that did not exist, letters that were the flimsiest of
forgeries, a prostitute who became Marie Antoinette. The mind is infi-
nitely vulnerable to suggestion, and even more so when strong desires are
involved. And nothing is stronger than the desire to change the past, right a
wrong, satisfy a disappointment. Find these desires in your victims and cre-
ating a believable fantasy will be simple for you: few have the power to see
through an illusion they desperately want to believe in.
