142 • The Art of Seduction
5. In 1762, in the city of Turin, Italy, Giovanni Giacomo Casanova made
the acquaintance of one Count A.B., a Milanese gentleman who seemed to
like him enormously. The count had fallen on hard times and Casanova
lent him some money. In gratitude, the count invited Casanova to stay with
him and his wife in Milan. His wife, he said, was from Barcelona, and was
admired far and wide for her beauty. He showed Casanova her letters,
which had an intriguing wit; Casanova imagined her as a prize worth se-
ducing. He went to Milan.
Arriving at the house of Count A.B., Casanova found that the Spanish
lady was certainly beautiful, but that she was also quiet and serious. Some-
thing about her bothered him. As he was unpacking his clothes, the count-
ess saw a stunning red dress, trimmed with sable, among his belongings. It
was a gift, Casanova explained, for any Milanese lady who won his heart.
The following evening at dinner, the countess was suddenly more
friendly, teasing and bantering with Casanova. She described the dress as a
bribe—he would use it to persuade a woman to give in to him. On the
contrary, said Casanova, he only gave gifts afterward, as tokens of his appre-
ciation. That evening, in a carriage on the way back from the opera, she
asked him if a wealthy friend of hers could buy the dress, and when he said
no, she was clearly vexed. Sensing her game, Casanova offered to give her
the sable dress if she was kind to him. This only made her angry, and they
quarreled.
Finally Casanova had had enough of the countess's moods: he sold the
dress for 15,000 francs to her wealthy friend, who in turn gave it to her, as
she had planned all along. But to prove his lack of interest in money,
Casanova told the countess he would give her the 15,000 francs, no strings
attached. "You are a very bad man," she said, "but you can stay, you amuse
me." She resumed her coquettish manner, but Casanova was not fooled. "It
is not my fault, madame, if your charms have so little power over me," he
told her. "Here are 15,000 francs to console you." He laid the money on a
table and walked out, leaving the countess fuming and vowing revenge.
When Casanova first met the Spanish lady, two things about her repelled
him. First, her pride: rather than engaging in the give-and-take of seduc-
tion, she demanded a man's subjugation. Pride can reflect self-assurance,
signaling that you will not abase yourself before others. Just as often,
though, it stems from an inferiority complex, which demands that others
abase themselves before you. Seduction requires an openness to the other
person, a willingness to bend and adapt. Excessive pride, without anything
to justify it, is highly anti-seductive.
The second quality that disgusted Casanova was the countess's greed:
her coquettish little games were designed only to get the dress—she had no
interest in romance. For Casanova, seduction was a lighthearted game that
people played for their mutual amusement. In his scheme of things, it was
fine if a woman wanted money and gifts as well; he could understand that
desire, and he was a generous man. But he also felt that this was a desire a
The Anti-Seducer • 143
woman should disguise—she should create the impression that what she
was after was pleasure. The person who is obviously angling for money or
other material reward can only repel. If that is your intention, if you are
looking for something other than pleasure—for money, for power—never
show it. The suspicion of an ulterior motive is anti-seductive. Never let
anything break the illusion.
6. In 1868, Queen Victoria of England hosted her first private meeting
with the country's new prime minister, William Gladstone. She had met
him before, and knew his reputation as a moral absolutist, but this was to be
a ceremony, an exchange of pleasantries. Gladstone, however, had no pa-
tience for such things. At that first meeting he explained to the queen his
theory of royalty: the queen, he believed, had to play an exemplary role
in England—a role she had lately failed to live up to, for she was overly
private.
This lecture set a bad tone for the future, and things only got worse:
soon Victoria was receiving letters from Gladstone, addressing the subject
in even greater depth. Half of them she never bothered to read, and soon
she was doing everything she could to avoid contact with the leader of her
government; if she had to see him, she made the meeting as brief as possi-
ble. To that end, she never allowed him to sit down in her presence, hoping
that a man his age would soon tire and leave. For once he got going on a
subject dear to his heart, he did not notice your look of disinterest or the
tears in your eyes from yawning. His memoranda on even the simplest of
issues would have to be translated into plain English for her by a member of
her staff. Worst of all, Gladstone argued with her, and his arguments had a
way of making her feel stupid. She soon learned to nod her head and ap-
pear to agree with whatever abstract point he was trying to make. In a let-
ter to her secretary, referring to herself in the third person, she wrote, "She
always felt in [Gladstone's] manner an overbearing obstinacy and imperi-
ousness . . . which she never experienced from anyone else, and which she
found most disagreeable." Over the years, these feelings hardened into an
unwaning hatred.
As the head of the Liberal Party, Gladstone had a nemesis, Benjamin
Disraeli, the head of the Conservative Party. He considered Disraeli amoral,
a devilish Jew. At one session of Parliament, Gladstone tore into his rival,
scoring point after point as he described where his opponents policies
would lead. Growing angry as he spoke (as usually happened when he
talked of Disraeli), he pounded the speaker's table with such force that pens
and papers went flying. Through all of this Disraeli seemed half-asleep.
When Gladstone had finished, he opened his eyes, rose to his feet, and
calmly walked up to the table. "The right honorable gentleman," he said,
"has spoken with much passion, much eloquence, and much—ahem—
violence." Then, after a drawn-out pause, he continued, "But the damage
can be repaired"—and he proceeded to gather up everything that had fallen
