
Opening a Wound
In the coal-mining town of Eastwood, in central England, David Herbert
Lawrence was considered something of a strange lad. Pale and delicate,
he had no time for games or boyish pursuits, but was interested in litera-
ture; and he preferred the company of girls, who made up most of his
friends. Lawrence often visited the Chambers family, who had been his
neighbors until they moved out of Eastwood to a farm not far away. He
liked to study with the Chambers sisters, particularly Jessie; she was shy and
serious, and getting her to open up and confide in him was a pleasurable
challenge. Jessie grew quite attached to Lawrence over the years, and they
became good friends.
One day in 1906, Lawrence, twenty-one at the time, did not show up
at the usual hour for his study session with Jessie. He finally arrived much
later, in a mood she had never seen before—preoccupied and quiet. Now it
was her turn to make him open up. Finally he talked: he felt she was getting
too close to him. What about her future? Whom would she marry? Cer-
tainly not him, he said, for they were just friends. But it was unfair of him
to keep her from seeing others. They should of course remain friends and
have their talks, but maybe less often. When he finished and left, she felt a
strange emptiness. She had yet to think much about love or marriage. Sud-
denly she had doubts. What would her future be? Why wasn't she thinking
about it? She felt anxious and upset, without understanding why.
Lawrence continued to visit, but everything had changed. He criticized
her for this and that. She wasn't very physical. What kind of wife would
she make anyway? A man needed more from a woman than just talk. He
likened her to a nun. They began to see each other less often. When, some
time later, Lawrence accepted a teaching position at a school outside Lon-
don, she felt part relieved to be rid of him for a while. But when he said
goodbye to her, and intimated that it might be for the last time, she broke
down and cried. Then he started sending her weekly letters. He would
write about girls he was seeing; maybe one of them would be his wife. Fi-
nally, at his behest, she visited him in London. They got along well, as in
the old times, but he continued to badger her about her future, picking at
that old wound. At Christmas he was back in Eastwood, and when he vis-
ited her he seemed exultant. He had decided that it was Jessie he should
marry, that he had in fact been attracted to her all along. They should keep
it quiet for a while; although his writing career was taking off (his firstNo one can fall in love if
he is even partially satisfied
with what he has or who
he is. The experience of
falling in love originates in
an extreme depression, an
inability to find something
that has value in everyday
life. The "symptom" of
the predisposition to fall in
love is not the conscious
desire to do so, the intense
desire to enrich our lives; it
is the profound sense of
being worthless and of
having nothing that is
valuable and the shame of
not having it. . . . For this
reason, falling in love
occurs more frequently
among young people, since
they are profoundly
uncertain, unsure of their
worth, and often ashamed
of themselves. The same
thing applies to people of
other ages when they lose
something in their lives—
when their youth ends or
when they start to grow
old.
—FRANCESCO ALBERONI,
FALLING IN LOVE, TRANSLATED
BY LAWRENCE VENUTI
205
