314 • The Art of Seduction
greatest romance of your life," the gypsy told her. "He is somebody you al-
ready know. . . . You must relent and give in to him totally. Only if you do
that will you find happiness at long last." Not knowing who this man could
be, Rita, who had a weakness for the occult, decided to extend her stay.
Aly Khan came back; he told her that his château overlooking the Mediter-
ranean was the perfect place to escape from the press and forget her trou-
bles, and that he would behave himself. She relented. Life in the château
was like a fairy tale; wherever she turned, his Indian helpers were there to
attend to her every wish. At night he would take her into his enormous
ballroom, where they would dance all by themselves. Could this be the
man the fortune-teller meant?
Aly Khan invited his friends over to meet her. Among this strange
company she felt alone again, and depressed; she decided to leave the
château. Just then, as if he had read her thoughts, Aly Khan whisked her off
to Spain, the country that fascinated her most. The press caught on to the
affair, and began to hound them in Spain: Rita had had a daughter with
Welles—was this any way for a mother to act? Aly Khan's reputation did
not help, but he stood by her, shielding her from the press as best he could.
Now she was more alone than ever, and more dependent on him.
Near the end of the trip, Aly Khan proposed to Rita. She turned him
down; she did not think he was the kind of man you married. He followed
her to Hollywood, where her former friends were less friendly than be-
fore. Thank God she had Aly Khan to help her. A year later she finally
succumbed, abandoning her career, moving to Aly Khan's château, and
marrying him.
Interpretation. Aly Khan, like a lot of men, fell in love with Rita Hay-
worth the moment he saw the film Gilda, in 1948. He made up his mind
that he would seduce her somehow. The moment he heard she was coming
to the Riviera, he got his friend Elsa Maxwell to lure her to the party and
seat her next to him. He knew about the breakup of her marriage, and
how vulnerable she was. His strategy was to block out everything else in
her world—problems, other men, suspicion of him and his motives, etc.
His campaign began with the display of an intense interest in her life—
constant phone calls, flowers, gifts, all to keep him in her mind. He set up
the fortune-teller to plant the seed. When she began to fall for him, he in-
troduced her to his friends, knowing she would feel alienated among them,
and therefore dependent on him. Her dependence was heightened by the
trip to Spain, where she was on unfamiliar territory, besieged by reporters,
and forced to cling to him for help. He slowly came to dominate her
thoughts. Everywhere she turned, there he was. Finally she succumbed, out
of weakness and the boost to her vanity that his attention represented. Un-
der his spell, she forgot about his horrid reputation, relinquishing the suspi-
cions that were the only thing protecting her from him.
It was not Aly Khan's wealth or looks that made him a great seducer.ANNE: Didst thou not kill
this king [Henry VI]? \
RICHARD: I grant ye. ... \
ANNE: And thou unfit for
any place, but hell. \
RICHARD: Yes, one place
else, if you will hear me
name it. \ ANNE: Some
dungeon. \ RICHARD:
Your bedchamber, \ ANNE:
Ill rest betide the chamber
where thou liest! \
RICHARD: So will it,
madam, till I lie with you.
. . . But gentle Lady
Anne . . . \ Is not the
causer of the timeless
deaths \ Of these
Plantagenets, Henry and
Edward, \ As blameful as
the executioner? \ ANNE:
Thou wast the cause and
most accursed effect. \
RICHARD: Your beauty
was the cause of that
effect— \ Your beauty, that
did haunt me in my sleep \
To undertake the death of
all the world, \ So I might
live one hour in your sweet
bosom.
—WILLIAM SHAKESPEARE,
THE TRAGEDY OF KING
RICHARD III
My child, my sister, dream
\ How sweet all things
would seem \ Were we in
that kind land to live
together, \And there love
slow and long, \ There love
and die among \ Those
scenes that image you, that
sumptuous weather. \
Drowned suns that
glimmer there \ Through
cloud-dishevelled air \
Move me with such a
mystery as appears \
Within those other skies \
Of your treacherous eyes \
When I behold them
shining through their tears.
\ There, there is nothing
else but grace and measure,
\ Richness, quietness, and
pleasure. . . . \ See,
Isolate the Victim • 315
He was not in fact very handsome, and his wealth was more than offset by
his bad reputation. His success was strategic: he isolated his victims, work-
ing so slowly and subtly that they did not notice it. The intensity of his at-
tention made a woman feel that in his eyes, at that moment, she was the
only woman in the world. This isolation was experienced as pleasure; the
woman did not notice her growing dependence, how the way he filled up
her mind with his attention slowly isolated her from her friends and her
milieu. Her natural suspicions of the man were drowned out by his intoxi-
cating effect on her ego. Aly Khan almost always capped off his seductions
by taking the woman to some enchanted place on the globe—a place that
he knew well, but where the woman felt lost.
Do not give your targets the time or space to worry about, suspect, or
resist you. Flood them with the kind of attention that crowds out all other
thoughts, concerns, and problems. Remember—people secretly yearn to be
led astray by someone who knows where they are going. It can be a plea-
sure to let go, and even to feel isolated and weak, if the seduction is done
slowly and gracefully.
Put them in a spot where they have no place to go, and
they will die before fleeing.
—SUN-TZU
Keys to Seduction
The people around you may seem strong, and more or less in control of
their lives, but that is merely a facade. Underneath, people are more
brittle than they let on. What lets them seem strong is the series of nests
and safety nets they envelop themselves in—their friends, their families,
their daily routines, which give them a feeling of continuity, safety, and
control. Suddenly pull the rug out from under them, drop them alone into
some foreign place where the familiar signposts are gone or scrambled, and
you will see a very different person.
A target who is strong and settled is hard to seduce. But even the stron-
gest people can be made vulnerable if you can isolate them from their nests
and safety nets. Block out their friends and family with your constant pres-
ence, alienate them from the world they are used to, and take them to
places they do not know. Get them to spend time in your environment. De-
liberately disturb their habits, get them to do things they have never done.
They will grow emotional, making it easier to lead them astray. Disguise all
this in the form of a pleasurable experience, and your targets will wake up
one day distanced from everything that normally comforts them. Then
they will turn to you for help, like a child crying out for its mother when
the lights are turned out. In seduction, as in warfare, the isolated target is
weak and vulnerable.
In Samuel Richardson's Clarissa, written in 1748, the rake Lovelace issheltered from the swells \
There in the still canals \
Those drowsy ships that
dream of sailing forth; \ It
is to satisfy \ Your least
desire, they ply \ Hither
through all the waters of
the earth. \ The sun at
close of day \ Clothes the
fields of hay, \ Then the
canals, at last the town
entire \ In hyacinth and
gold: \ Slowly the land is
rolled \ Sleepward under a
sea of gentle fire. \ There,
there is nothing else but
grace and measure, \
Richness, quietness, and
pleasure.
—CHARLES BAUDELAIRE,
"INVITATION TO THE VOYAGE,"
THE FLOWERS OF EVIL,
TRANSLATED BY RICHARD
WILBUR
