274 • The Art of Seduction
induce), taking her hand, lighting her cigarette, escorting her to romantic
places, leading her on the dance floor. These were silent movies, and his
audiences never got to hear him speak—it was all in his gestures. Men came
to hate him, for their wives and girlfriends now expected the slow, careful
Valentino treatment.
Valentino had a feminine streak; it was said that he wooed a woman the
way another woman would. But femininity need not figure in this ap-
proach to seduction. In the early 1770s, Prince Gregory Potemkin began
an affair with Empress Catherine the Great of Russia that was to last many
years. Potemkin was a manly man, and not at all handsome. But he man-
aged to win the empress's heart by the many little things he did, and con-
tinued to do long after the affair had begun. He spoiled her with wonderful
gifts, never tired of writing her long letters, arranged for all kinds of enter-
tainments for her, composed songs to her beauty. Yet he would appear be-
fore her barefoot, hair uncombed, clothes wrinkled. There was no kind of
fussiness in his attention, which, however, did make it clear he would go to
the ends of the earth for her. A woman's senses are more refined than a
man's; to a woman, Yang Kuei-fei's overt sensual appeal would seem too
hurried and direct. What that means, though, is that all the man really has
to do is take it slowly, making seduction a ritual full of all kinds of little
things he has to do for his target. If he takes his time, he will have her eat-
ing out of his hand.
Everything in seduction is a sign, and nothing more so than clothes. It
is not that you have to dress interestingly, elegantly, or provocatively, but
that you have to dress for your target—have to appeal to your target's tastes.
When Cleopatra was seducing Mark Antony, her dress was not brazenly
sexual; she dressed as a Greek goddess, knowing his weakness for such fan-
tasy figures. Madame de Pompadour, the mistress of King Louis XV, knew
the king's weakness, his chronic boredom; she constantly wore different
clothes, changing not only their color but their style, supplying the king
with a constant feast for his eyes. Pamela Harriman was subdued in the
fashions she wore, befitting her role as a high-society geisha and reflecting
the sober tastes of the men she seduced. Contrast works well here: at work
or at home, you might dress nonchalantly—Marilyn Monroe, for example,
wore jeans and a T-shirt at home—but when you are with the target you
wear something elaborate, as if you were putting on a costume. Your Cin-
derella transformation will stir excitement, and the feeling that you have
done something just for the person you are with. Whenever your attention
is individualized (you would not dress like that for anyone else), it is infi-
nitely more seductive.
In the 1870s, Queen Victoria found herself wooed by Benjamin Dis-
raeli, her own prime minister. Disraeli's words were flattering and his
manner insinuating; he also sent her flowers, valentines, gifts—but not just
any flowers or gifts, the kind that most men would send. The flowers were
primroses, symbols of their simple yet beautiful friendship. From then on,
whenever Victoria saw a primrose she thought of Disraeli. Or he would
Pay Attention to Detail • 275
write on a valentine that he, "no longer in the sunset, but the twilight of
his existence, must encounter a life of anxiety and toil; but this, too, has its
romance, when he remembers that he labors for the most gracious of be-
ings!" Or he might send her a little box, with no inscription, but with a
heart transfixed by an arrow on one side and the word "Fideliter," or
"Faithfully," on the other. Victoria fell in love with Disraeli.
A gift has immense seductive power, but the object itself is less impor-
tant than the gesture, and the subtle thought or emotion that it communi-
cates. Perhaps the choice relates to something from the target's past, or
symbolizes something between you, or merely represents the lengths you
will go to to please. It was not the money Disraeli spent that impressed Vic-
toria, but the time he took to find the appropriate thing or make the ap-
propriate gesture. Expensive gifts have no sentiment attached; they may
temporarily excite their recipient but they are quickly forgotten, as a child
forgets a new toy. The object that reflects its giver's attentiveness has a lin-
gering sentimental power, which resurfaces every time its owner sees it.
In 1919, the Italian writer and war hero Gabriele D'Annunzio managed
to put together a band of followers and take over the town of Fiume, on
the Adriatic coast (now part of Slovenia). They established their own gov-
ernment there, which lasted for over a year. D'Annunzio initiated a series
of public spectacles that were to be immensely influential on politicians
elsewhere. He would address the public from a balcony overlooking the
town's main square, which would be full of colorful banners, flags, pagan
religious symbols, and, at night, torches. The speeches would be followed
by processions. Although D'Annunzio was not at all a Fascist, what he did
in Fiume crucially affected Benito Mussolini, who borrowed his Roman
salutes, his use of symbols, his mode of public address. Spectacles like these
have been used since then by governments everywhere, even democratic
ones. Their overall impression may be grand, but it is the orchestrated de-
tails that make them work—the number of senses they appeal to, the vari-
ety of emotions they stir. You are aiming to distract people, and nothing is
more distracting than a wealth of detail—fireworks, flags, music, uniforms,
marching soldiers, the feel of the crowd packed together. It becomes diffi-
cult to think straight, particularly if the symbols and details stir up patriotic
emotions.
Finally, words are important in seduction, and have a great deal of
power to confuse, distract, and boost the vanity of the target. But what is
most seductive in the long run is what you do not say, what you communi-
cate indirectly. Words come easily, and people distrust them. Anyone can
say the right words; and once they are said, nothing is binding, and they
may even be forgotten altogether. The gesture, the thoughtful gift, the little
details seem much more real and substantial. They are also much more
charming than lofty words about love, precisely because they speak for
themselves and let the seduced read into them more than is there. Never
tell someone what you are feeling; let them guess it in your looks and ges-
tures. That is the more convincing language.
