134 • The Art of Seduction
The Brute. If seduction is a kind of ceremony or ritual, part of the plea-
sure is its duration—the time it takes, the waiting that increases anticipa-
tion. Brutes have no patience for such things; they are concerned only with
their own pleasure, never with yours. To be patient is to show that you are
thinking of the other person, which never fails to impress. Impatience has
the opposite effect: assuming you are so interested in them you have no rea-
son to wait, Brutes offend you with their egotism. Underneath that ego-
tism, too, there is often a gnawing sense of inferiority, and if you spurn
them or make them wait, they overreact. If you suspect you are dealing
with a Brute, do a test—make that person wait. His or her response will tell
you everything you need to know.
The Suffocator. Suffocators fall in love with you before you are even half-
aware of their existence. The trait is deceptive—you might think they have
found you overwhelming—but the fact is they suffer from an inner void, a
deep well of need that cannot be filled. Never get involved with Suffoca-
tors; they are almost impossible to free yourself from without trauma. They
cling to you until you are forced to pull back, whereupon they smother you
with guilt. We tend to idealize a loved one, but love takes time to develop.
Recognize Suffocators by how quickly they adore you. To be so admired
may give a momentary boost to your ego, but deep inside you sense that
their intense emotions are not related to anything you have done. Trust
these instincts.
A subvariant of the Suffocator is the Doormat, a person who slavishly
imitates you. Spot these types early on by seeing whether they are capable
of having an idea of their own. An inability to disagree with you is a bad
sign.
The Moralizer. Seduction is a game, and should be undertaken with a
light heart. All is fair in love and seduction; morality never enters the pic-
ture. The character of the Moralizer, however, is rigid. These are people
who follow fixed ideas and try to make you bend to their standards. They
want to change you, to make you a better person, so they endlessly criticize
and judge—that is their pleasure in life. In truth, their moral ideas stem
from their own unhappiness, and mask their desire to dominate those
around them. Their inability to adapt and to enjoy makes them easy to rec-
ognize; their mental rigidity may also be accompanied by a physical stiff-
ness. It is hard not to take their criticisms personally so it is better to avoid
their presence and their poisoned comments.
The Tightwad. Cheapness signals more than a problem with money. It is a
sign of something constricted in a person's character—something that
keeps them from letting go or taking a risk. It is the most anti-seductiveladies began to laugh and
to say that the man
concerned hardly deserved
the name of gentleman;
and many of the men felt
as ashamed as he should
have been, had he ever had
the sense to recognize such
disgraceful behavior for
what it was.
—BALDASSARE CASTIGLIONE,
THE BOOK OF THE COURTIER,
TRANSLATED BY GEORGE BULL
Let us see now how love is
diminished. This happens
through the easy
accessibility of its
consolations, through one's
being able to see and
converse lengthily with a
lover, through a lover's
unsuitable garb and gait,
and by the sudden onset of
poverty. . . . • Another
cause of diminution of love
is the realization of the
notoriety of one's lover, and
accounts of his miserliness,
bad character, and general
wickedness; also any affair
with another woman, even
if it involves no feelings of
love. Love is also
diminished if a woman
realizes that her lover is
foolish and undiscerning, or
if she sees him going too far
in demands of love, giving
no thought to his partner's
modesty nor wishing to
pardon her blushes. A
faithful lover ought to
choose the harshest pains of
love rather than by his
demands cause his partner
embarrassment, or take
pleasure in spurning her
modesty; for one who
thinks only of the outcome
of his own pleasure, and
ignores the welfare of his
partner, should be called a
traitor rather than a lover. •
Love also suffers decrease if
the woman realizes that
her lover is fearful in war,
The Anti-Seducer • 135
trait of all, and you cannot allow yourself to give in to it. Most tightwads
do not realize they have a problem; they actually imagine that when they
give someone some paltry crumb, they are being generous. Take a hard
look at yourself—you are probably cheaper than you think. Try giving
more freely of both your money and yourself and you will see the seduc-
tive potential in selective generosity. Of course you must keep your gener-
osity under control. Giving too much can be a sign of desperation, as if
you were trying to buy someone.
The Bumbler. Bumblers are self-conscious, and their self-consciousness
heightens your own. At first you may think they are thinking about you,
and so much so that it makes them awkward. In fact they are only thinking
of themselves—worrying about how they look, or about the consequences
for them of their attempt to seduce you. Their worry is usually contagious:
soon you are worrying too, about yourself. Bumblers rarely reach the final
stages of a seduction, but if they get that far, they bungle that too. In se-
duction, the key weapon is boldness, refusing the target the time to stop
and think. Bumblers have no sense of timing. You might find it amusing
to try to train or educate them, but if they are still Bumblers past a certain
age, the case is probably hopeless—they are incapable of getting outside
themselves.
The Windbag. The most effective seductions are driven by looks, indirect
actions, physical lures. Words have a place, but too much talk will generally
break the spell, heightening surface differences and weighing things down.
People who talk a lot most often talk about themselves. They have never
acquired that inner voice that wonders, Am I boring you? To be a Windbag
is to have a deep-rooted selfishness. Never interrupt or argue with these
types—that only fuels their windbaggery. At all costs learn to control your
own tongue.
The Reactor. Reactors are far too sensitive, not to you but to their own
egos. They comb your every word and action for signs of a slight to their
vanity. If you strategically back off, as you sometimes must in seduction,
they will brood and lash out at you. They are prone to whining and com-
plaining, two very anti-seductive traits. Test them by telling a gentle joke or
story at their expense: we should all be able to laugh at ourselves a little, but
the Reactor cannot. You can read the resentment in their eyes. Erase any
reactive qualities in your own character—they unconsciously repel people.
The Vulgarian. Vulgarians are inattentive to the details that are so impor-
tant in seduction. You can see this in their personal appearance—theiror sees that he has no
patience, or is stained with
the vice of pride. There is
nothing which appears
more appropriate to the
character of any lover than
to be clad in the adornment
of humility, utterly
untouched by the
nakedness of pride. • Then
too the prolixity of a fool
or a madman often
diminishes love. There arc
many keen to prolong their
crazy words in the presence
of a woman, thinking that
they please her if they
employ foolish, ill-judged
language, but in fact they
are strangely deceived.
Indeed, he who thinks that
his foolish behavior pleases
a wise woman suffers from
the greatest poverty of
sense.
—ANDREAS CAPELLANUS,"HOW
LOVE IS DIMINISHED,"
TRANSLATED BY P. G.WALSH
Real men \ Shouldn't
primp their good
looks. . . . \ Keep
pleasantly clean, take
exercise, work up an
outdoor \ Tan; make quite
sure that your toga fits \
And doesn't show spots;
don't lace your shoes too
tightly \ Or ignore any
rusty buckles, or slop \
Around in too large a
fitting. Don't let some
incompetent barber \ Ruin
your looks: both hair and
beard demand \ Expert
attention. Keep your nails
pared, and dirt-free; \
Don't let those long hairs
sprout \ In your nostrils,
make sure your breath is
never offensive, \ Avoid the
rank male stench \ That
wrinkles noses. . . . \ I was
about to warn you
[women] against rank
goatish armpits \ And
bristling hair on your legs, \
