402 • The Art of Seduction
honied in on a victim, he dropped everything else. The woman was made
to feel that everything came second to her—his career, his friends, every-
thing. Then he would take her on a little trip, preferably with water
around. Slowly the rest of the world would fade into the background, and
Flynn would take center stage. The more your targets think of you, the less
they are distracted by thoughts of work and duty. When the mind focuses
on one thing it relaxes, and when the mind relaxes, all the little paranoid
thoughts that we are prone to—do you really like me, am I intelligent or
beautiful enough, what does the future hold—vanish from the surface. Re-
member: it all starts with you. Be undistracted, present in the moment, and
the target will follow suit. The intense gaze of the hypnotist creates a simi-
lar reaction in the patient.
Once the target's overactive mind starts to slow down, their senses will
come to life, and your physical lures will have double their power. Now a
heated glance will give them flush. You will have a tendency to employ
physical lures that work primarily on the eyes, the sense we most rely on in
our culture. Physical appearances are critical, but you are after a general agi-
tation of the senses. La Belle Otero made sure men noticed her breasts, her
figure, her perfume, her walk; no part was allowed to predominate. The
senses are interconnected—an appeal to smell will trigger touch, an appeal
to touch will trigger vision: casual or "accidental" contact—better a brush-
ing of the skin than something more forceful right now—will create a
jolt and activate the eyes. Subtly modulate the voice, make it slower and
deeper. Living senses will crowd out rational thought.
In the eighteenth-century libertine novel The Wayward Head and Heart,
by Crébillon fils, Madame de Lursay is trying to seduce a younger man,
Meilcour. Her weapons are several. One night at a party she is hosting, she
wears a revealing gown; her hair is slightly tousled; she throws him heated
glances; her voice trembles a bit. When they are alone, she innocently gets
him to sit close to her, and talks more slowly; at one point she starts to cry.
Meilcour has many reasons to resist her; he has fallen in love with a girl his
own age, and he has heard rumors about Madame de Lursay that should
make him distrust her. But the clothes, the looks, the perfume, the voice,
the closeness of her body, the tears—it all begins to overwhelm him. "An
indescribable agitation stirred my senses." Meilcour succumbs.
The French libertines of the eighteenth century called this "the mo-
ment." The seducer leads the victim to a point where he or she reveals in-
voluntary signs of physical excitation that can be read in various symptoms.
Once those signs are detected, the seducer must work quickly, applying
pressure on the target to get lost in the moment—the past, the future, all
moral scruples vanishing in air. Once your victims lose themselves in the
moment, it is all over—their mind, their conscience, no longer holds them
back. The body gives in to pleasure. Madame de Lursay lures Meilcour into
the moment by creating a generalized disorder of the senses, rendering him
incapable of thinking straight.
In leading your victims into the moment, remember a few things. First,with the sailors' song that
drifts to me \ Are mingled
odors of the tamarind, \
—And all my soul is scent
and melody.
—CHARLES BAUDELAIRE,
"EXOTIC PERFUME,"
THE FLOWERS OF EVIL,
TRANSLATED BY ALAN CONDER
Use Physical Lures • 403
a disordered look (Madame de Lursay's tousled hair, her ruffled dress) has
more effect on the senses than a neat appearance. It suggests the bedroom.
Second, be alert to the signs of physical excitation. Blushing, trembling of
the voice, tears, unusually forceful laughter, relaxing movements of the
body (any kind of involuntary mirroring, their gestures imitating yours), a
revealing slip of the tongue—these are signs that the victim is slipping into
the moment and pressure is to be applied.
In 1934, a Chinese football player named Li met a young actress named
Lan Ping in Shanghai. He began to see her often at his matches, cheering
him on. They would meet at public affairs, and he would notice her glanc-
ing at him with her "strange, yearning eyes," then looking away. One eve-
ning he found her seated next to him at a reception. Her leg brushed up
against his. They chatted, and she asked him to see a movie with her at a
nearby cinema. Once they were there, her head found its way onto his
shoulder; she whispered into his ear, something about the film. Later they
strolled the streets, and she put her arm around his waist. She brought him
to a restaurant where they drank some wine. Li took her to his hotel room,
and there he found himself overwhelmed by caresses and sweet words. She
gave him no room to retreat, no time to cool down. Three years later Lan
Ping—soon to be renamed Jiang Qing—played a similar game on Mao Ze-
dong. She was to become Mao's wife—the infamous Madame Mao, leader
of the Gang of Four.
Seduction, like warfare, is often a game of distance and closeness. At
first you track your enemy from a distance. Your main weapons are your
eyes, and a mysterious manner. Byron had his famous underlook, Madame
Mao her yearning eyes. The key is to make the look short and to the point,
then look away, like a rapier glancing the flesh. Make your eyes reveal de-
sire, and keep the rest of the face still. (A smile will spoil the effect.) Once
the victim is heated up, you quickly bridge the distance, turning to hand-
to-hand combat in which you give the enemy no room to withdraw, no
time to think or to consider the position in which you have placed him or
her. To take the element of fear out of this, use flattery, make the target feel
more masculine or feminine, praise their charms. It is their fault that you
have become so physical and aggressive. There is no greater physical lure
than to make the target feel alluring. Remember: the girdle of Aphrodite,
which gave her untold seductive powers, included that of sweet flattery.
Shared physical activity is always an excellent lure. The Russian mystic
Rasputin would begin his seductions with a spiritual lure—the promise of
a shared religious experience. But then his eyes would bore into his target
at a party, and inevitably he would lead her in a dance, which would be-
come more and more suggestive as he moved closer to her. Hundreds of
women succumbed to this technique. For Flynn it was swimming or sail-
ing. In such physical activity, the mind turns off and the body operates ac-
cording to its own laws. The target's body will follow your lead, will mirror
your moves, as far as you want it to go.
In the moment, all moral considerations fade away, and the body re-
