
Good and Bad
In 1806, when Prussia and France were at war, Auguste, the handsome
twenty-four-year-old prince of Prussia and nephew of Frederick the
Great, was captured by Napoleon. Instead of locking him up, Napoleon al-
lowed him to wander around French territory, keeping a close watch on
him through spies. The prince was devoted to pleasure, and spent his time
moving from town to town, seducing young girls. In 1807 he decided to
visit the Château de Coppet, in Switzerland, where lived the great French
writer Madame de Stae'l.
Auguste was greeted by his hostess with as much ceremony as she could
muster. After she had introduced him to her other guests, they all retired to
a drawing room, where they talked of Napoleon's war in Spain, the current
Paris fashions, and so on. Suddenly the door opened and another guest en-
tered, a woman who had somehow stayed in her room during the hubbub
of the prince's entrance. It was the thirty-year-old Madame Récamier,
Madame de Staël's closest friend. She introduced herself to the prince, then
quickly retired to her bedroom.
Auguste had known that Madame Récamier was at the château. In fact
he had heard many stories about this infamous woman, who, in the years
after the French Revolution, was considered the most beautiful in France.
Men had gone wild over her, particularly at balls when she would take off
her evening wrap, revealing the diaphanous white dresses that she had made
famous, and dance with such abandon. The painters Gérard and David had
immortalized her face and fashions, and even her feet, considered the most
beautiful anyone had ever seen; and she had broken the heart of Lucien
Bonaparte, the Emperor Napoleon's brother. Auguste liked his girls
younger than Madame Récamier, and he had come to the château to rest.
But those few moments in which she had stolen the scene with her sudden
entrance caught him off guard: she was as beautiful as people had said, but
more striking than her beauty was that look of hers that seemed so sweet,
indeed heavenly, with a hint of sadness in the eyes. The other guests con-
tinued their conversations, but Auguste could only think of Madame
Récamier.
Over dinner that evening, he watched her. She did not talk much, and
kept her eyes downward, but once or twice she looked up—directly at the
prince. After dinner the guests assembled in the gallery, and a harp was
brought in. To the prince's delight, Madame Récamier began to play,Reichardt had seen Juliette
at another ball, protesting
coyly that she would not
dance, and then, after a
while, throwing off her
heavy evening gown, to
reveal a light dress
underneath. On all sides,
there were murmurs and
whisperings about her
coquetry and affectation.
As ever, she wore white
satin, cut very low in the
back, revealing her
charming shoulders. The
men implored her to dance
for them. ... To soft
music she floated into the
room in her diaphanous
Greek robe. Her head was
bound with a muslin fichu.
She bowed timidly to the
audience, and then,
spinning round lightly, she
shook a transparent scarf
with her fingertips, so that
in turns it billowed into the
semblance of a drapery, a
veil, a cloud. All this with
a strange blend of precision
and languor. She used her
eyes in a subtle fascinating
way— "she danced with
her eyes." The women
thought that all that
serpentine undulating of
the body, all that
nonchalant rhythmic
nodding of the head, were
sensuous; the men were
wafted into a realm of
187
