110 • The Art of Seduction
(Krishnamurti politely declined.) When he visited India, hands would
reach out from the crowd to try to touch him through the open car win-
dow. People prostrated themselves before him.
Repulsed by all this adoration, Krishnamurti grew more and more de-
tached. He even talked about himself in the third person. In fact, the ability
to disengage from one's past and view the world anew was part of his phi-
losophy, yet once again the effect was the opposite of what he expected:
the affection and reverence people felt for him only grew. His followers
fought jealously for signs of his favor. Women in particular fell deeply in
love with him, although he was a lifelong celibate.
Krishnamurti had no desire to be a guru or a Charismatic, but he inadver-
tently discovered a law of human psychology that disturbed him. People do
not want to hear that your power comes from years of effort or discipline.
They prefer to think that it comes from your personality, your character,
something you were born with. They also hope that proximity to the guru
or Charismatic will make some of that power rub off on them. They did
not want to have to read Krishnamurti's books, or to spend years practicing
his lessons—they simply wanted to be near him, soak up his aura, hear him
speak, feel the light that entered the room with him. Krishnamurti advo-
cated simplicity as a way of opening up to the truth, but his own simplicity
just allowed people to see what they wanted in him, attributing powers to
him that he not only denied but ridiculed.
This is the guru effect, and it is surprisingly simple to create. The aura
you are after is not the fiery one of most Charismatics, but one of incan-
descence, enlightenment. An enlightened person has understood some-
thing that makes him or her content, and this contentment radiates outward.
That is the appearance you want: you do not need anything or anyone, you
are fulfilled. People are naturally drawn to those who emit happiness;
maybe they can catch it from you. The less obvious you are, the better: let
people conclude that you are happy, rather than hearing it from you. Let
them see it in your unhurried manner, your gentle smile, your ease and
comfort. Keep your words vague, letting people imagine what they will.
Remember: being aloof and distant only stimulates the effect. People
will fight for the slightest sign of your interest. A guru is content and
detached—a deadly Charismatic combination.
The drama saint. It began on the radio. Throughout the late 1930s and
early 1940s, Argentine women would hear the plaintive, musical voice of
Eva Duarte in one of the lavishly produced soap operas that were so popu-
lar at the time. She never made you laugh, but how often she could make
you cry—with the complaints of a betrayed lover, or the last words of
Marie Antoinette. The very thought of her voice made you shiver with
emotion. And she was pretty, with her flowing blond hair and her serious
face, which was often on the covers of the gossip magazines.Only a month after Evita's
death, the newspaper
vendors' union put forward
her name for canonization,
and although this gesture
was an isolated one and
was never taken seriously
by the Vatican, the idea of
Evita's holiness remained
with many people and was
reinforced by the
publication of devotional
literature subsidized by
the government; by the
renaming of cities, schools,
and subway stations; and
by the stamping of
medallions, the casting
of busts, and the issuing of
ceremonial stamps. The
time of the evening news
broadcast was changed from
8:30 P.M. to 8:25 P.M.,
the time when Evita had
"passed into immortality,"
and each month there were
torch-lit processions on the
twenty-sixth of the month,
the day of her death. On
the first anniversary of her
death, La Prensa printed a
story about one of its
readers seeing Evita's face
in the face of the moon,
and after this there were
many more such sightings
reported in the newspapers.
For the most part, official
publications stopped short
of claiming sainthood for
her, but their restraint was
not always convincing. . . .
In the calendar for 1953 of
the Buenos Aires
newspaper vendors, as in
other unofficial images,
she was depicted in the
traditional blue robes of the
Virgin, her hands crossed,
her sad head to one side
and surrounded by a halo.
—NICHOLAS FRASER AND
MARYSA NAYARRO. EVITA
The Charismatic • 111
In 1943, those magazines published a most exciting story: Eva had
begun an affair with one of the most dashing men in the new military
government, Colonel Juan Perón. Now Argentines heard her doing propa-
ganda spots for the government, lauding the "New Argentina" that glis-
tened in the future. And finally, this fairy tale story reached its perfect
conclusion: in 1945 Juan and Eva married, and the following year, the
handsome colonel, after many trials and tribulations (including a spell in
prison, from which he was freed by the efforts of his devoted wife) was
elected president. He was a champion of the descamisados—the "shirtless
ones," the workers and the poor, just as his wife was. Only twenty-six at the
time, she had grown up in poverty herself.
Now that this star was the first lady of the republic, she seemed to
change. She lost weight, most definitely; her outfits became less flamboy-
ant, even downright austere; and that beautiful flowing hair was now pulled
back, rather severely. It was a shame—the young star had grown up. But as
Argentines saw more of the new Evita, as she was now known, her new
look affected them more strongly. It was the look of a saintly, serious
woman, one who was indeed what her husband called the "Bridge of
Love" between himself and his people. She was now on the radio all the
time, and listening to her was as emotional as ever, but she also spoke mag-
nificently in public. Her voice was lower and her delivery slower; she
stabbed the air with her fingers, reached out as if to touch the audience.
And her words pierced you to the core: "I left my dreams by the wayside in
order to watch over the dreams of others. ... I now place my soul at the
side of the soul of my people. I offer them all my energies so that my body
may be a bridge erected toward the happiness of all. Pass over it ... toward
the supreme destiny of the new fatherland."
It was no longer only through magazines and the radio that Evita made
herself felt. Almost everyone was personally touched by her in some way.
Everyone seemed to know someone who had met her, or who had visited
her in her office, where a line of supplicants wound its way through the
hallways to her door. Behind her desk she sat, so calm and full of love. Film
crews recorded her acts of charity: to a woman who had lost everything,
Evita would give a house; to one with a sick child, free care in the finest
hospital. She worked so hard, no wonder rumor had it that she was ill. And
everyone heard of her visits to the shanty towns and to hospitals for the
poor, where, against the wishes of her staff, she would kiss people with all
kinds of maladies (lepers, syphilitic men, etc.) on the cheek. Once an assis-
tant appalled by this habit tried to dab Evita's lips with alcohol, to sterilize
them. This saint of a woman grabbed the bottle and smashed it against the
wall.
Yes, Evita was a saint, a living madonna. Her appearance alone could
heal the sick. And when she died of cancer, in 1952, no outsider to Ar-
gentina could possibly understand the sense of grief and loss she left be-
hind. For some, the country never recovered.
* * *As for me, I have the gift
of electrifying men.
—NAPOLEON BONAPARTE, IN
PIETER GEYL, NAPOLEON: FOR
AND AGAINST
I do not pretend to be a
divine man, but I do
believe in divine guidance,
divine power, and divine
prophecy. I am not
educated, nor am I an
expert in any particular
field—but I am sincere and
my sincerity is my
credentials.
—MALCOLM X, QUOTED IN
EUGENE VICTORWOLFENSTEIN,
THE VICTIMS OF DEMOCRACY:
MALCOLM X AND THIS BLACK
REVOLUTION
