Use Physical Lures • 401
with an open, unrestrained attitude that infected their minds. Understand:
it all starts from you. When the time comes to make the seduction physical,
train yourself to let go of your own inhibitions, your doubts, your linger-
ing feelings of guilt and anxiety. Your confidence and ease will have more
power to intoxicate the victim than all the alcohol you could apply. Exhibit
a lightness of spirit—nothing bothers you, nothing daunts you, you take
nothing personally. You are inviting your targets to shed the burdens of
civilization, to follow your lead and drift. Do not talk of work, duty, mar-
riage, the past or future. Plenty of other people will do that. Instead, offer
the rare thrill of losing oneself in the moment, where the senses come dive
and the mind is left behind.
When he kissed me, it evoked a response I had never
known or imagined before, a giddying of all my senses. It
was instinctive joy, against which no warning, reasoning
monitor within me availed. It was new and irresistible and
finally overpowering. Seduction—the word implies being
led—and so gently, so tenderly.
—LINDA CHRISTIAN
Keys to Seduction
Now more than ever, our minds are in a state of constant distraction,
barraged with endless information, pulled in every direction. Many
of us recognize the problem: articles are written, studies are completed, but
they simply become more information to digest. It is almost impossible to
turn off an overactive mind; the attempt simply triggers more thoughts—
an inescapable hall of mirrors. Perhaps we turn to alcohol, to drugs, to
physical activity—anything to help us slow the mind, be more present in
the moment. Our discontent presents the crafty seducer with infinite op-
portunity. The waters around you are teeming with people seeking some
kind of release from mental overstimulation. The lure of unencumbered
physical pleasure will make them take your bait, but as you prowl the wa-
ters, understand: the only way to relax a distracted mind is to make it focus
on one thing. A hypnotist asks the patient to focus on a watch swinging
back and forth. Once the patient focuses, the mind relaxes, the senses
awaken, the body becomes prone to all kinds of novel sensations and sug-
gestions. As a seducer, you are a hypnotist, and what you are making the
target focus on is you.
Throughout the seductive process you have been filling the target's
mind. Letters, mementos, shared experiences keep you constantly present,
even when you are not there. Now, as you shift to the physical part of
the seduction, you must see your targets more often. Your attention must
become more intense. Errol Flynn was a master at this game. When heready to do anything in
their desire to abandon
themselves, even for a few
moments, to their trained
embraces.
—G. R.TABOUIS, THE PRIVATE
LIFE OF TUTANKHAMEN,
TRANSLATED BY M. R. DOBIE
CÉLIE: What is the
moment, and how do you
define it? Because I must
say in all good honesty that
I do not understand you. •
THE DUKE: A certain
disposition of the senses, as
unexpected as it is
involuntary, which a
woman can conceal, but
which, should it be
perceived or sensed by
someone who might profit
from it, puts her in the
greatest danger of being a
little more willing than she
thought she ever should or
could be.
—CRÉBILLON FILS, LE HASARD
AU COIN DU FEU, QUOTED IN
MICHEL FEHER, ED., THE
LIBERTINE READER
When, on an autumn
evening, with closed eyes, \
I breathe the warm dark
fragrance of your breast, \
Before me blissful shores
unfold, caressed \ By
dazzling fires from blue
unchanging skies. \ And
there, upon that calm and
drowsing isle, \ Grow
luscious fruits amid
fantastic trees: \ There,
men are lithe: the women
of those seas \ Amaze one
with their gaze that knows
no guile. \ Your perfume
wafts me thither like a
wind: \ I see a harbor
thronged with masts and
sails \ Still weary from the
tumult of the gales; \ And
402 • The Art of Seduction
honied in on a victim, he dropped everything else. The woman was made
to feel that everything came second to her—his career, his friends, every-
thing. Then he would take her on a little trip, preferably with water
around. Slowly the rest of the world would fade into the background, and
Flynn would take center stage. The more your targets think of you, the less
they are distracted by thoughts of work and duty. When the mind focuses
on one thing it relaxes, and when the mind relaxes, all the little paranoid
thoughts that we are prone to—do you really like me, am I intelligent or
beautiful enough, what does the future hold—vanish from the surface. Re-
member: it all starts with you. Be undistracted, present in the moment, and
the target will follow suit. The intense gaze of the hypnotist creates a simi-
lar reaction in the patient.
Once the target's overactive mind starts to slow down, their senses will
come to life, and your physical lures will have double their power. Now a
heated glance will give them flush. You will have a tendency to employ
physical lures that work primarily on the eyes, the sense we most rely on in
our culture. Physical appearances are critical, but you are after a general agi-
tation of the senses. La Belle Otero made sure men noticed her breasts, her
figure, her perfume, her walk; no part was allowed to predominate. The
senses are interconnected—an appeal to smell will trigger touch, an appeal
to touch will trigger vision: casual or "accidental" contact—better a brush-
ing of the skin than something more forceful right now—will create a
jolt and activate the eyes. Subtly modulate the voice, make it slower and
deeper. Living senses will crowd out rational thought.
In the eighteenth-century libertine novel The Wayward Head and Heart,
by Crébillon fils, Madame de Lursay is trying to seduce a younger man,
Meilcour. Her weapons are several. One night at a party she is hosting, she
wears a revealing gown; her hair is slightly tousled; she throws him heated
glances; her voice trembles a bit. When they are alone, she innocently gets
him to sit close to her, and talks more slowly; at one point she starts to cry.
Meilcour has many reasons to resist her; he has fallen in love with a girl his
own age, and he has heard rumors about Madame de Lursay that should
make him distrust her. But the clothes, the looks, the perfume, the voice,
the closeness of her body, the tears—it all begins to overwhelm him. "An
indescribable agitation stirred my senses." Meilcour succumbs.
The French libertines of the eighteenth century called this "the mo-
ment." The seducer leads the victim to a point where he or she reveals in-
voluntary signs of physical excitation that can be read in various symptoms.
Once those signs are detected, the seducer must work quickly, applying
pressure on the target to get lost in the moment—the past, the future, all
moral scruples vanishing in air. Once your victims lose themselves in the
moment, it is all over—their mind, their conscience, no longer holds them
back. The body gives in to pleasure. Madame de Lursay lures Meilcour into
the moment by creating a generalized disorder of the senses, rendering him
incapable of thinking straight.
In leading your victims into the moment, remember a few things. First,with the sailors' song that
drifts to me \ Are mingled
odors of the tamarind, \
—And all my soul is scent
and melody.
—CHARLES BAUDELAIRE,
"EXOTIC PERFUME,"
THE FLOWERS OF EVIL,
TRANSLATED BY ALAN CONDER
