50 • The Art of Seduction
with the same relish they show for their clothes. This was how the great
Roman writer Petronius, author of the Satyricon, was able to seduce the
emperor Nero. Unlike the dull Seneca, the great Stoic thinker and Nero's
tutor, Petronius knew how to make every detail of life a grand aesthetic ad-
venture, from a feast to a simple conversation. This is not an attitude you
should impose on those around you—you can't make yourself a nuisance—
but if you simply seem socially confident and sure of your taste, people will
be drawn to you. The key is to make everything an aesthetic choice. Your
ability to alleviate boredom by making life an art will make your company
highly prized.
The opposite sex is a strange country we can never know, and this ex-
cites us, creates the proper sexual tension. But it is also a source of annoy-
ance and frustration. Men do not understand how women think, and vice
versa; each tries to make the other act more like a member of their own
sex. Dandies may never try to please, but in this one area they have a pleas-
ing effect: by adopting psychological traits of the opposite sex, they appeal
to our inherent narcissism. Women identified with Rudolph Valentino's
delicacy and attention to detail in courtship; men identified with Lou
Andreas-Salomé's lack of interest in commitment. In the Heian court of
eleventh-century Japan, Sei Shonagon, the writer of The Pillow Book, was
powerfully seductive for men, especially literary types. She was fiercely in-
dependent, wrote poetry with the best, and had a certain emotional dis-
tance. Men wanted more from her than just to be her friend or companion,
as if she were another man; charmed by her empathy for male psychology,
they fell in love with her. This kind of mental transvestism—the ability to
enter the spirit of the opposite sex, adapt to their way of thinking, mirror
their tastes and attitudes—can be a key element in seduction. It is a way of
mesmerizing your victim.
According to Freud, the human libido is essentially bisexual; most peo-
ple are in some way attracted to people of their own sex, but social con-
straints (varying with culture and historical period) repress these impulses.
The Dandy represents a release from such constraints. In several of Shake-
speare's plays, a young girl (back then, the female roles in the theater were
actually played by male actors) has to go into disguise and dresses up as a
boy, eliciting all kinds of sexual interest from men, who later are delighted
to find out that the boy is actually a girl. (Think, for example, of Rosalind
in As You Like It.) Entertainers such as Josephine Baker (known as the
Chocolate Dandy) and Marlene Dietrich would dress up as men in their acts,
making themselves wildly popular—among men. Meanwhile the slightly
feminized male, the pretty boy, has always been seductive to women. Valen-
tino embodied this quality. Elvis Presley had feminine features (the face, the
hips), wore frilly pink shirts and eye makeup, and attracted the attention of
women early on. The filmmaker Kenneth Anger said of Mick Jagger that it
was "a bisexual charm which constituted an important part of the attrac-
tion he had over young girls . . . and which acted upon their unconscious."
In Western culture for centuries, in fact, feminine beauty has been far more
The Dandy • 51
fetishized than male beauty, so it is understandable that a feminine-looking
face like that of Montgomery Clift would have more seductive power than
that of John Wayne.
The Dandy figure has a place in politics as well. John F. Kennedy was a
strange mix of the masculine and feminine, virile in his toughness with the
Russians, and in his White House lawn football games, yet feminine in his
graceful and dapper appearance. This ambiguity was a large part of his ap-
peal. Disraeli was an incorrigible Dandy in dress and manner; some were
suspicious of him as a result, but his courage in not caring what people
thought of him also won him respect. And women of course adored him,
for women always adore a Dandy. They appreciated the gentleness of his
manner, his aesthetic sense, his love of clothes—in other words, his femi-
nine qualities. The mainstay of Disraeli's power was in fact a female fan:
Queen Victoria.
Do not be misled by the surface disapproval your Dandy pose may
elicit. Society may publicize its distrust of androgyny (in Christian the-
ology, Satan is often represented as androgynous), but this conceals its
fascination; what is most seductive is often what is most repressed. Learn a
playful dandyism and you will become the magnet for people's dark, unre-
alized yearnings.
The key to such power is ambiguity. In a society where the roles every-
one plays are obvious, the refusal to conform to any standard will excite in-
terest. Be both masculine and feminine, impudent and charming, subtle
and outrageous. Let other people worry about being socially acceptable;
those types are a dime a dozen, and you are after a power greater than they
can imagine.
Symbol: The
Orchid. Its shape and color oddly sug-
gest both sexes, its odor is sweet and decadent
—it is a tropical flower of evil. Delicate and highly cul-
tivated, it is prized for its rarity; it is unlike any other flower.
