The Natural • 65
The story of Genji's life is told in the eleventh-century novel The Tale of
Genji, written by Murasaki Shikibu, a woman of the Heian court. The
character was most likely based on a real-life man, Fujiwara no Korechika.
Indeed another book of the period, The Pillow Book of Sei Shonagon, de-
scribes an encounter between the female author and Korechika, and reveals
his incredible charm and his almost hypnotic effect on women. Genji is a
Natural, an undefensive lover, a man who has a lifelong obsession with
women but whose appreciation of and affection for them makes him irre-
sistible. As he says to Oborozukiyo in the novel, "I am always allowed my
way." This self-belief is half of Genji's charm. Resistance does not make
him defensive; he retreats gracefully, reciting a little poetry, and as he leaves,
the perfume of his robes trailing behind him, his victim wonders why she
has been so afraid, and what she is missing by spurning him, and she finds a
way to let him know that the next time things will be different. Genji takes
nothing seriously or personally, and at the age of forty, an age at which
most men of the eleventh century were already looking old and worn, he
still seems like a boy. His seductive powers never leave him.
Human beings are immensely suggestible; their moods will easily spread
to the people around them. In fact seduction depends on mimesis, on the
conscious creation of a mood or feeling that is then reproduced by the
other person. But hesitation and awkwardness are also contagious, and
are deadly to seduction. If in a key moment you seem indecisive or self-
conscious, the other person will sense that you are thinking of yourself, in-
stead of being overwhelmed by his or her charms. The spell will be broken.
As an undefensive lover, though, you produce the opposite effect: your vic-
tim might be hesitant or worried, but confronted with someone so sure and
natural, he or she will be caught up in the mood. Like dancing with some-
one you lead effortlessly across the dance floor, it is a skill you can learn. It
is a matter of rooting out the fear and awkwardness that have built up in
you over the years, of becoming more graceful with your approach, less de-
fensive when others seem to resist. Often people's resistance is a way of
testing you, and if you show any awkwardness or hesitation, you not only
will fail the test, but you will risk infecting them with your doubts.
Symbol: The
Lamb. So soft and endearing. At
two days old the lamb can gambol gracefully;
within a week it is playing "Follow the Leader."
Its weakness is part of its charm. The Lamb is pure inno-
cence, so innocent we want to possess it, even devour it.
66 • The Art of Seduction
Dangers
Achildish quality can be charming but it can also be irritating; the inno-
cent have no experience of the world, and their sweetness can prove
cloying. In Milan Kundera's novel The Book of Laughter and Forgetting, the
hero dreams that he is trapped on an island with a group of children. Soon
their wonderful qualities become intensely annoying to him; after a few
days of exposure to them he cannot relate to them at all. The dream turns
into a nightmare, and he longs to be back among adults, with real things to
do and talk about. Because total childishness can quickly grate, the most se-
ductive Naturals are those who, like Josephine Baker, combine adult expe-
rience and wisdom with a childlike manner. It is this mixture of qualities
that is most alluring.
Society cannot tolerate too many Naturals. Given a crowd of Cora
Pearls or Charlie Chaplins, their charm would quickly wear off. In any case
it is usually only artists, or people with abundant leisure time, who can af-
ford to go all the way. The best way to use the Natural character type is in
specific situations when a touch of innocence or impishness will help lower
your target's defenses. A con man plays dumb to make the other person
trust him and feel superior. This kind of feigned naturalness has countless
applications in daily life, where nothing is more dangerous than looking
smarter than the next person; the Natural pose is the perfect way to disguise
your cleverness. But if you are uncontrollably childish and cannot turn it
off, you run the risk of seeming pathetic, earning not sympathy but pity
and disgust.
Similarly, the seductive traits of the Natural work best in one who is
still young enough for them to seem natural. They are much harder for an
older person to pull off. Cora Pearl did not seem so charming when she
was still wearing her pink flouncy dresses in her fifties. The Duke of Buck-
ingham, who seduced everyone in the English court in the 1620s (includ-
ing the homosexual King James I himself), was wondrously childish in
looks and manner; but this became obnoxious and off-putting as he grew
older, and he eventually made enough enemies that he ended up being mur-
dered. As you age, then, your natural qualities should suggest more the
child's open spirit, less an innocence that will no longer convince anyone.
