60 • The Art of Seduction
dark side: he was an adventurer, a gambler, and a rake, and in 1849 he
abandoned his family and left for America. The Crouches were now in dire
straits. Emma was told that her father had died in an accident and she was
sent off to a convent. The loss of her father affected her deeply, and as the
years went by she seemed lost in the past, acting as if he still doted on her.
One day in 1856, when Emma was walking home from church, a well-
dressed gentleman invited her home for some cakes. She followed him to
his house, where he proceeded to take advantage of her. The next morning
this man, a diamond merchant, promised to set her up in a house of her
own, treat her well, and give her plenty of money. She took the money but
left him, determined to do what she had always wanted: never see her
family again, never depend on anyone, and lead the grand life that her fa-
ther had promised her.
With the money the diamond merchant had given her, Emma bought
nice clothes and rented a cheap flat. Adopting the flamboyant name of
Cora Pearl, she began to frequent London's Argyll Rooms, a fancy gin
palace where harlots and gentlemen rubbed elbows. The proprietor of the
Argyll, a Mr. Bignell, took note of this newcomer to his establishment—
she was so brazen for a young girl. At forty-five, he was much older
than she was, but he decided to be her lover and protector, lavishing her
with money and attention. The following year he took her to Paris, which
was at the height of its Second Empire prosperity. Cora was enthralled by
Paris, and of all its sights, but what impressed her the most was the parade
of rich coaches in the Bois de Boulogne. Here the fashionable came to take
the air—the empress, the princesses, and, not least the grand courtesans,
who had the most opulent carriages of all. This was the way to lead the
kind of life Cora's father had wanted for her. She promptly told Bignell that
when he went back to London, she would stay on alone.
Frequenting all the right places, Cora soon came to the attention of
wealthy French gentlemen. They would see her walking the streets in a
bright pink dress, to complement her flaming red hair, pale face, and freck-
les. They would glimpse her riding wildly through the Bois de Boulogne,
cracking her whip left and right. They would see her in cafes surrounded
by men, her witty insults making them laugh. They also heard of her
exploits—of her delight in showing her body to one and all. The elite of
Paris society began to court her, particularly the older men who had grown
tired of the cold and calculating courtesans, and who admired her girlish
spirit. As money began to pour in from her various conquests (the Duc de
Mornay, heir to the Dutch throne; Prince Napoleon, cousin to the Em-
peror), Cora spent it on the most outrageous things—a multicolored car-
riage pulled by a team of cream-colored horses, a rose-marble bathtub with
her initials inlaid in gold. Gentlemen vied to be the one who would spoil
her the most. An Irish lover wasted his entire fortune on her, in only eight
weeks. But money could not buy Cora's loyalty; she would leave a man on
the slightest whim.
Cora Pearl's wild behavior and disdain for etiquette had all of Paris onPrince Gortschakoff used
to say that she [Cora
Pearl] was the last word in
luxury, and that he would
have tried to steal the sun
to satisfy one of her whims.
—GUSTAVE CLAUDIN, CORA
PEARL CONTEMPORARY
Apparently the possession of
humor implies the
possession of a number of
typical habit-systems. The
first is an emotional one: the
habit of playfulness. Why
should one be proud of
being playful? For a double
reason. First, playfulness
connotes childhood and
youth. If one can be playful,
one still possesses something
of the vigor and the joy of
young life . . . • But there
is a deeper implication. To
be playful is, in a sense, to
be free. When a person is
playful, he momentarily
disregards the binding
necessities which compel
him, in business and morals,
in domestic and community
life. . . . • What galls us is
that the binding necessities
do not permit us to shape
our world as we please. . . .
What we most deeply
desire, however, is to create
our world for ourselves.
Whenever we can do
that, even in the slightest
degree, we are happy. Now
in play we create our own
world. . . .
—PROFESSOR H.A.
OVERSTREET, INFLUENCING
HUMAN BEHAVIOR
The Natural • 61
edge. In 1864, she was to appear as Cupid in the Offenbach operetta Or-
pheus in the Underworld. Society was dying to see what she would do to
cause a sensation, and soon found out: she came on stage practically naked,
except for expensive diamonds here and there, barely covering her. As she
pranced on stage, the diamonds fell off, each one worth a fortune; she did
not stoop to pick them up, but let them roll off into the footlights. The
gentlemen in the audience, some of whom had given her those diamonds,
applauded her wildly. Antics like this made Cora the toast of Paris, and she
reigned as the city's supreme courtesan for over a decade, until the Franco-
Prussian War of 1870 put an end to the Second Empire.
People often mistakenly believe that what makes a person desirable and se-
ductive is physical beauty, elegance, or overt sexuality. Yet Cora Pearl was
not dramatically beautiful; her body was boyish, and her style was garish
and tasteless. Even so, the most dashing men of Europe vied for her favors,
often ruining themselves in the process. It was Cora's spirit and attitude that
enthralled them. Spoiled by her father, she imagined that spoiling her was
natural—that all men should do the same. The consequence was that, like a
child, she never felt she had to try to please. It was Cora's powerful air of
independence that made men want to possess her, tame her. She never pre-
tended to be anything more than a courtesan, so the brazenness that in a
lady would have been uncivil in her seemed natural and fun. And as with a
spoiled child, a man's relationship with her was on her terms. The moment
he tried to change that, she lost interest. This was the secret of her astound-
ing success.
Spoiled children have an undeservedly bad reputation: while those who
are spoiled with material things are indeed often insufferable, those who are
spoiled with affection know themselves to be deeply seductive. This be-
comes a distinct advantage when they grow up. According to Freud (who
was speaking from experience, since he was his mother's darling), spoiled
children have a confidence that stays with them all their lives. This quality
radiates outward, drawing others to them, and, in a circular process, making
people spoil them still more. Since their spirit and natural energy were
never tamed by a disciplining parent, as adults they are adventurous and
bold, and often impish or brazen.
The lesson is simple: it may be too late to be spoiled by a parent, but it
is never too late to make other people spoil you. It is all in your attitude.
People are drawn to those who expect a lot out of life, whereas they tend
to disrespect those who are fearful and undemanding. Wild independence
has a provocative effect on us: it appeals to us, while also presenting us with
a challenge—we want to be the one to tame it, to make the spirited person
dependent on us. Half of seduction is stirring such competitive desires.
3. In October of 1925, Paris society was all excited about the opening of
the Revue Negre. Jazz, or in fact anything that came from black America,All was quiet again. (Genji
slipped the latch open and
tried the doors. They had
not been bolted. A curtain
had been set up just inside,
and in the dim light he
could make out Chinese
chests and other furniture
scattered in some disorder.
He made his way through
to her side. She lay by
herself, a slight little figure.
Though vaguely annoyed
at being disturbed, she
evidently took him for
the woman Chujo until he
pulled back the covers.
• ... His manner was so
gently persuasive that
devils and demons could
not have gainsaid him.
• ... She was so small
that he lifted her easily. As
he passed through the doors
to his own room, he came
upon Chujo who had been
summoned earlier. He
called out in surprise.
Surprised in turn, Chujo
peered into the darkness.
The perfume that came
from his robes like a cloud
of smoke told her who he
was. . . . [Chujo] followed
after, but Genji was quite
unmoved by her pleas. •
"Come for her in the
morning," he said, sliding
the doors closed. • The
lady was bathed in
perspiration and quite
beside herself at the
thought of what Chujo,
and the others too, would
be thinking. Genji had to
feel sorry for her. Yet the
sweet words poured forth,
the whole gamut of pretty
devices for making a
woman surrender. . . . •
One may imagine that
he found many kind
promises with which to
comfort her. . . .
—MURASAKI SHIKIBU,
THE TALE OF GENJI,
TRANSLATED BY EDWARD G.
SEIDENSTICKER
