74 • The Art of Seduction
Keys to the Character
According to the popular concept, Coquettes are consummate teases,
experts at arousing desire through a provocative appearance or an al-
luring attitude. But the real essence of Coquettes is in fact their ability to
trap people emotionally, and to keep their victims in their clutches long af-
ter that first titillation of desire. This is the skill that puts them in the ranks
of the most effective seducers. Their success may seem somewhat odd,
since they are essentially cold and distant creatures; should you ever get to
know one well, you will sense his or her inner core of detachment and self-
love. It may seem logical that once you become aware of this quality you
will see through the Coquette's manipulations and lose interest, but more
often we see the opposite. After years of Josephine's coquettish games,
Napoleon was well aware of how manipulative she was. Yet this conqueror
of kingdoms, this skeptic and cynic, could not leave her.
To understand the peculiar power of the Coquette, you must first
understand a critical property of love and desire: the more obviously you
pursue a person, the more likely you are to chase them away. Too much at-
tention can be interesting for a while, but it soon grows cloying and finally
becomes claustrophobic and frightening. It signals weakness and neediness,
an unseductive combination. How often we make this mistake, thinking
our persistent presence will reassure. But Coquettes have an inherent un-
derstanding of this particular dynamic. Masters of selective withdrawal,
they hint at coldness, absenting themselves at times to keep their victim off
balance, surprised, intrigued. Their withdrawals make them mysterious,
and we build them up in our imaginations. (Familiarity, on the other hand,
undermines what we have built.) A bout of distance engages the emotions
further; instead of making us angry, it makes us insecure. Perhaps they
don't really like us, perhaps we have lost their interest. Once our vanity is at
stake, we succumb to the Coquette just to prove we are still desirable. Re-
member: the essence of the Coquette lies not in the tease and temptation
but in the subsequent step back, the emotional withdrawal. That is the key
to enslaving desire.
To adopt the power of the Coquette, you must understand one other
quality: narcissism. Sigmund Freud characterized the "narcissistic woman"
(most often obsessed with her appearance) as the type with the greatest ef-
fect on men. As children, he explains, we pass through a narcissistic phase
that is immensely pleasurable. Happily self-contained and self-involved, we
have little psychic need of other people. Then, slowly, we are socialized and
taught to pay attention to others—but we secretly yearn for those blissful
early days. The narcissistic woman reminds a man of that period, and makes
him envious. Perhaps contact with her will restore that feeling of self-
involvement.
A man is also challenged by the female Coquette's independence—he
wants to be the one to make her dependent, to burst her bubble. It is far
more likely, though, that he will end up becoming her slave, giving her in-torches, and the bier, were
now being prepared, but
his body was nowhere to be
found. Instead of his
corpse, they discovered a
flower with a circle of white
petals round a yellow
centre.
—OVID, METAMORPHOSES,
TRANSLATED BY
MARY M. INNES
Selfishness is one of the
qualities apt to inspire love.
—NATHANIEL HAWTHORNE
The Socrates whom you
see has a tendency to fall in
love with good-looking
young men, and is always
in their society and in an
ecstasy about them...but
once you see beneath the
surface you will discover a
degree of self-control of
which you can hardly form
a notion, gentlemen. . . .
He spends his whole life
pretending and playing
with people, and I doubt
whether anyone has ever
seen the treasures which are
revealed when he grows
serious and exposes what
he keeps inside. •
. . . Believing that he was
serious in his admiration of
my charms, I supposed that
a wonderful piece of good
luck had befallen me; I
should now be able, in
return for my favours, to
find out all that Socrates
knew; for you must know
that there was no limit to
the pride that I felt in my
good looks. With this end
in view I sent away my
attendant, whom hitherto I
had always kept with me
in my encounters with
Socrates, and left myself
alone with him. I must tell
you the whole truth; attend
carefully, and do you,
The Coquette • 75
cessant attention to gain her love, and failing. For the narcissistic woman is
not emotionally needy; she is self-sufficient. And this is surprisingly seduc-
tive. Self-esteem is critical in seduction. (Your attitude toward yourself is
read by the other person in subtle and unconscious ways.) Low self-esteem
repels, confidence and self-sufficiency attract. The less you seem to need
other people, the more likely others will be drawn to you. Understand the
importance of this in all relationships and you will find your neediness
easier to suppress. But do not confuse self-absorption with seductive narcis-
sism. Talking endlessly about yourself is eminently anti-seductive, revealing
not self-sufficiency but insecurity.
The Coquette is traditionally thought of as female, and certainly the
strategy was for centuries one of the few weapons women had to engage
and enslave a man's desire. One ploy of the Coquette is the withdrawal of
sexual favors, and we see women using this trick throughout history: the
great seventeenth-century French courtesan Ninon de l'Enclos was desired
by all the preeminent men of France, but only attained real power when
she made it clear that she would no longer sleep with a man as part of her
duty. This drove her admirers to despair, which she knew how to make
worse by favoring a man temporarily, granting him access to her body for a
few months, then returning him to the pack of the unsatisfied. Queen
Elizabeth I of England took coquettishness to the extreme, deliberately
arousing the desires of her courtiers but sleeping with none of them.
Long a tool of social power for women, coquettishness was slowly adapted
by men, particularly the great seducers of the seventeenth and eighteenth
centuries who envied the power of such women. One seventeenth-century
seducer, the Duc de Lauzun, was a master at exciting a woman, then sud-
denly acting aloof. Women went wild over him. Today, coquetry is gender-
less. In a world that discourages direct confrontation, teasing, coldness, and
selective aloofness are a form of indirect power that brilliantly disguises its
own aggression.
The Coquette must first and foremost be able to excite the target of his
or her attention. The attraction can be sexual, the lure of celebrity, what-
ever it takes. At the same time, the Coquette sends contrary signals that
stimulate contrary responses, plunging the victim into confusion. The
eponymous heroine of Marivaux's eighteenth-century French novel Mari-
anne is the consummate Coquette. Going to church, she dresses tastefully,
but leaves her hair slightly uncombed. In the middle of the service she
seems to notice this error and starts to fix it, revealing her bare arm as she
does so; such things were not to be seen in an eighteenth-century church,
and all male eyes fix on her for that moment. The tension is much more
powerful than if she were outside, or were tartily dressed. Remember: ob-
vious flirting will reveal your intentions too clearly. Better to be ambiguous
and even contradictory, frustrating at the same time that you stimulate.
The great spiritual leader Jiddu Krishnamurti was an unconscious co-
quette. Revered by theosophists as their "World Teacher," Krishnamurti was
also a dandy. He loved elegant clothing and was devilishly handsome. At theSocrates, pull me up if
anything I say is false. I
allowed myself to be alone
with him, I say,
gentlemen, and I naturally
supposed that he would
embark on conversation of
the type that a lover
usually addresses to his
darling when they are
tête-à-tête, and I was
glad. Nothing of the kind;
he spent the day with me
in the sort of talk which is
habitual with him, and
then left me and went
away. Next I invited him
to train with me in the
gymnasium, and I
accompanied him there,
believing that I should
succeed with him now. He
took exercise and wrestled
with me frequently, with
no one else present, but I
need hardly say that I was
no nearer my goal. Finding
that this was no good
either, I resolved to make a
direct assault on him, and
not to give up what I had
once undertaken; I felt that
I must get to the bottom of
the matter. So I invited
him to dine with me,
behaving just like a lover
who has designs upon his
favourite. He was in no
hurry to accept this
invitation, but at last he
agreed to come. The first
time he came he rose to go
away immediately after
dinner, and on that occasion
I was ashamed and let him
go. But I returned to the
attack, and this time I kept
him in conversation after
dinner far into the night,
and then, when he wanted
to be going, I compelled
him to stay, on the plea
that it was too late for him
to go. • So he betook
himself to rest, using as a
bed the couch on which he
had reclined at dinner, next
to mine, and there was
nobody sleeping in the
