
Isolation—the Exotic Effect
In the early fifth century B.C., Fu Chai, the Chinese king of Wu, defeated
his great enemy, Kou Chien, the king of Yueh, in a series of battles. Kou
Chien was captured and forced to serve as a groom in Fu Chai's stables. He
was finally allowed to return home, but every year he had to pay a large
tribute of money and gifts to Fu Chai. Over the years, this tribute added
up, so that the kingdom of Wu prospered and Fu Chai grew wealthy
One year Kou Chien sent a delegation to Fu Chai: they wanted to
know if he would accept a gift of two beautiful maidens as part of the trib-
ute. Fu Chai was curious, and accepted the offer. The women arrived a few
days later, amid much anticipation, and the king received them in his
palace. The two approached the throne—their hair was magnificently coif-
fured, in what was called "the cloud-cluster" style, ornamented with pearl
ornaments and kingfisher feathers. As they walked, jade pendants hanging
from their girdles made the most delicate sound. The air was full of some
delightful perfume. The king was extremely pleased. The beauty of one of
the girls far surpassed that of the other; her name was Hsi Shih. She looked
him in the eye without a hint of shyness; in fact she was confident and co-
quettish, something he was not used to seeing in such a young girl.
Fu Chai called for festivities to commemorate the occasion. The halls
of the palace filled with revelers; inflamed with wine, Hsi Shih danced be-
fore the king. She sang, and her voice was beautiful. Reclining on a couch
of white jade, she looked like a goddess. The king could not leave her side.
The next day he followed her everywhere. To his astonishment, she was
witty, sharp, and knowledgeable, and could quote the classics better than he
could. When he had to leave her to deal with royal affairs, his mind was full
of her image. Soon he brought her with him to his councils, asking her ad-
vice on important matters. She told him to listen less to his ministers; he
was wiser than they were, his judgment superior.
Hsi Shih's power grew daily. Yet she was not easy to please; if the king
failed to grant some wish of hers, tears would fill her eyes, his heart would
melt, and he would yield. One day she begged him to build her a palace
outside the capital. Of course, he obliged her. And when he visited the
palace, he was astounded at its magnificence, even though he had paid
the bills: Hsi Shih had filled it with the most extravagant furnishings. The
grounds contained an artificial lake with marble bridges crossing over it. Fu
Chai spent more and more time here, sitting by a pool and watching HsiIn the state of Wu great
preparations had been
made for the reception of
the two beauties. The king
received them in audience
surrounded by his ministers
and all his court. As they
approached him the jade
pendants attached to their
girdles made a musical
sound and the air was
fragrant with the scent of
their gowns. Pearl
ornaments and kingfisher
feathers adorned their hair.
• Fu Chai, the king of
Wu, looked into the lovely
eyes of Hsi Shih
(495-472 B.C.) and
forgot his people and his
state. Now she did not
turn away and blush as she
had done three years
previously beside the little
brook. She was complete
mistress of the art of
seduction and she knew
how to encourage the king
to look again. Fu Chai
hardly noticed the second
girl, whose quiet charms
did not attract him. He
had eyes only for Hsi
Shih, and before the
audience was over those at
court realized that the girl
would be a force to be
reckoned with and that she
would be able to influence
311
