The Charismatic • 113
through looking at where you live, then . . . take a walk across Central
Park," he would tell them. "Look at the white man's apartments. Look
at his Wall Street!" His words were powerful, particularly coming from a
minister.
In 1957, a young Muslim in Harlem witnessed the beating of a
drunken black man by several policemen. When the Muslim protested, the
police pummeled him senseless and carted him off to jail. An angry crowd
gathered outside the police station, ready to riot. Told that only Malcolm X
could forestall violence, the police commissioner brought him in and told
him to break up the mob. Malcolm refused. Speaking more temperately,
the commissioner begged him to reconsider. Malcolm calmly set conditions
for his cooperation: medical care for the beaten Muslim, and proper
punishment for the police officers. The commissioner reluctantly agreed.
Outside the station, Malcolm explained the agreement and the crowd
dispersed. In Harlem and around the country, he was an overnight hero—
finally a man who took action. Membership in his temple soared.
Malcolm began to speak all over the United States. He never read from
a text; looking out at the audience, he made eye contact, pointed his finger.
His anger was obvious, not so much in his tone—he was always controlled
and articulate—as in his fierce energy, the veins popping out on his neck.
Many earlier black leaders had used cautious words, and had asked their fol-
lowers to deal patiently and politely with their social lot, no matter how
unfair. What a relief Malcolm was. He ridiculed the racists, he ridiculed
the liberals, he ridiculed the president; no white person escaped his scorn.
If whites were violent, Malcolm said, the language of violence should be
spoken back to them, for it was the only language they understood. "Hos-
tility is good!" he cried out. "It's been bottled up too long." In response to
the growing popularity of the nonviolent leader Martin Luther King, Jr.,
Malcolm said, "Anybody can sit. An old woman can sit. A coward can
sit. ... It takes a man to stand."
Malcolm X had a bracing effect on many who felt the same anger he
did but were frightened to express it. At his funeral—he was assassinated in
1965, at one of his speeches—the actor Ossie Davis delivered the eulogy
before a large and emotional crowd: "Malcolm," he said, "was our own
black shining prince."
Malcolm X was a Charismatic of Moses' kind: he was a deliverer. The
power of this sort of Charismatic comes from his or her expression of dark
emotions that have built up over years of oppression. In doing so, the deliv-
erer provides an opportunity for the release of bottled-up emotions by
other people—of the hostility masked by forced politeness and smiles. De-
liverers have to be one of the suffering crowd, only more so: their pain
must be exemplary. Malcolm's personal history was an integral part of his
charisma. His lesson—that blacks should help themselves, not wait for
whites to lift them up—meant a great deal more because of his own years
in prison, and because he had followed his own doctrine by educating him-
114 • The Art of Seduction
self, lifting himself up from the bottom. The deliverer must be a living ex-
ample of personal redemption.
The essence of charisma is an overpowering emotion that communi-
cates itself in your gestures, In your tone of voice, in subtle signs that are
the more powerful for being unspoken. You feel something more deeply
than others, and no emotion is more powerful and more capable of creating
a charismatic reaction than hatred, particularly if it comes from deep-
rooted feelings of oppression. Express what others are afraid to express and
they will see great power in you. Say what they want to say but cannot.
Never be afraid of going too far. If you represent a release from oppression,
you have the leeway to go still farther. Moses spoke of violence, of destroy-
ing every last one of his enemies. Language like this brings the oppressed
together and makes them feel more alive. This is not, however, something
that is uncontrollable on your part. Malcolm X felt rage from early on, but
only in prison did he teach himself the art of oratory, and how to channel
his emotions. Nothing is more charismatic than the sense that someone is
struggling with great emotion rather than simply giving in to it.
The Olympian actor. On January 24, 1960 an insurrection broke out in
Algeria, then still a French colony. Led by right-wing French soldiers, its
purpose was to forestall the proposal of President Charles de Gaulle to
grant Algeria the right of self-determination. If necessary, the insurrection-
ists would take over Algeria in the name of France.
For several tense days, the seventy-year-old de Gaulle maintained a
strange silence. Then on January 29, at eight in the evening, he appeared
on French national television. Before he had uttered a word, the audience
was astonished, for he wore his old uniform from World War II, a uniform
that everyone recognized and that created a strong emotional response. De
Gaulle had been the hero of the resistance, the savior of the country at its
darkest moment. But that uniform had not been seen for quite some time.
Then de Gaulle spoke, reminding his public, in his cool and confident
manner, of all they had accomplished together in liberating France from
the Germans. Slowly he moved from these charged patriotic issues to the
rebellion in Algeria, and the affront it presented to the spirit of the libera-
tion. He finished his address by repeating his famous words of June 18,
1940: "Once again I call all Frenchmen, wherever they are, whatever they
are, to reunite with France. Vive la République! Vive la France!"
The speech had two purposes. It showed that de Gaulle was deter-
mined not to give an inch to the rebels, and it reached for the heart of all
patriotic Frenchmen, particularly in the army. The insurrection quickly
died, and no one doubted the connection between its failure and de
Gaulle's performance on television.
The following year, the French voted overwhelmingly in favor of Al-
gerian self-determination. On April 11, 1961, de Gaulle gave a press con-
ference in which he made it clear that France would soon grant the
