The Natural • 61
edge. In 1864, she was to appear as Cupid in the Offenbach operetta Or-
pheus in the Underworld. Society was dying to see what she would do to
cause a sensation, and soon found out: she came on stage practically naked,
except for expensive diamonds here and there, barely covering her. As she
pranced on stage, the diamonds fell off, each one worth a fortune; she did
not stoop to pick them up, but let them roll off into the footlights. The
gentlemen in the audience, some of whom had given her those diamonds,
applauded her wildly. Antics like this made Cora the toast of Paris, and she
reigned as the city's supreme courtesan for over a decade, until the Franco-
Prussian War of 1870 put an end to the Second Empire.
People often mistakenly believe that what makes a person desirable and se-
ductive is physical beauty, elegance, or overt sexuality. Yet Cora Pearl was
not dramatically beautiful; her body was boyish, and her style was garish
and tasteless. Even so, the most dashing men of Europe vied for her favors,
often ruining themselves in the process. It was Cora's spirit and attitude that
enthralled them. Spoiled by her father, she imagined that spoiling her was
natural—that all men should do the same. The consequence was that, like a
child, she never felt she had to try to please. It was Cora's powerful air of
independence that made men want to possess her, tame her. She never pre-
tended to be anything more than a courtesan, so the brazenness that in a
lady would have been uncivil in her seemed natural and fun. And as with a
spoiled child, a man's relationship with her was on her terms. The moment
he tried to change that, she lost interest. This was the secret of her astound-
ing success.
Spoiled children have an undeservedly bad reputation: while those who
are spoiled with material things are indeed often insufferable, those who are
spoiled with affection know themselves to be deeply seductive. This be-
comes a distinct advantage when they grow up. According to Freud (who
was speaking from experience, since he was his mother's darling), spoiled
children have a confidence that stays with them all their lives. This quality
radiates outward, drawing others to them, and, in a circular process, making
people spoil them still more. Since their spirit and natural energy were
never tamed by a disciplining parent, as adults they are adventurous and
bold, and often impish or brazen.
The lesson is simple: it may be too late to be spoiled by a parent, but it
is never too late to make other people spoil you. It is all in your attitude.
People are drawn to those who expect a lot out of life, whereas they tend
to disrespect those who are fearful and undemanding. Wild independence
has a provocative effect on us: it appeals to us, while also presenting us with
a challenge—we want to be the one to tame it, to make the spirited person
dependent on us. Half of seduction is stirring such competitive desires.
3. In October of 1925, Paris society was all excited about the opening of
the Revue Negre. Jazz, or in fact anything that came from black America,All was quiet again. (Genji
slipped the latch open and
tried the doors. They had
not been bolted. A curtain
had been set up just inside,
and in the dim light he
could make out Chinese
chests and other furniture
scattered in some disorder.
He made his way through
to her side. She lay by
herself, a slight little figure.
Though vaguely annoyed
at being disturbed, she
evidently took him for
the woman Chujo until he
pulled back the covers.
• ... His manner was so
gently persuasive that
devils and demons could
not have gainsaid him.
• ... She was so small
that he lifted her easily. As
he passed through the doors
to his own room, he came
upon Chujo who had been
summoned earlier. He
called out in surprise.
Surprised in turn, Chujo
peered into the darkness.
The perfume that came
from his robes like a cloud
of smoke told her who he
was. . . . [Chujo] followed
after, but Genji was quite
unmoved by her pleas. •
"Come for her in the
morning," he said, sliding
the doors closed. • The
lady was bathed in
perspiration and quite
beside herself at the
thought of what Chujo,
and the others too, would
be thinking. Genji had to
feel sorry for her. Yet the
sweet words poured forth,
the whole gamut of pretty
devices for making a
woman surrender. . . . •
One may imagine that
he found many kind
promises with which to
comfort her. . . .
—MURASAKI SHIKIBU,
THE TALE OF GENJI,
TRANSLATED BY EDWARD G.
SEIDENSTICKER
62 • The Art of Seduction
was the latest fashion, and the Broadway dancers and performers who made
up the Revue Nègre were African-American. On opening night, artists
and high society packed the hall. The show was spectacular, as they ex-
pected, but nothing prepared them for the last number, performed by a
somewhat gawky long-legged woman with the prettiest face: Josephine
Baker, a twenty-year-old chorus girl from East St. Louis. She came onstage
bare-breasted, wearing a skirt of feathers over a satin bikini bottom, with
feathers around her neck and ankles. Although she performed her number,
called "Danse Sauvage," with another dancer, also clad in feathers, all eyes
were riveted on her: her whole body seemed to come alive in a way the au-
dience had never seen before, her legs moving with the litheness of a cat,
her rear end gyrating in patterns that one critic likened to a hummingbird's.
As the dance went on, she seemed possessed, feeding off the crowd's ecsta-
tic reaction. And then there was the look on her face: she was having such
fun. She radiated a joy that made her erotic dance oddly innocent, even
slightly comic.
By the following day, word had spread: a star was born. Josephine be-
came the heart of the Revue Nègre, and Paris was at her feet. Within a
year, her face was on posters everywhere; there were Josephine Baker per-
fumes, dolls, clothes; fashionable Frenchwomen were slicking their hair
back a la Baker, using a product called Bakerfix. They were even trying to
darken their skin.
Such sudden fame represented quite a change, for just a few years ear-
lier, Josephine had been a young girl growing up in East St. Louis, one of
America's worst slums. She had gone to work at the age of eight, cleaning
houses for a white woman who beat her. She had sometimes slept in a rat-
infested basement; there had never been heat in the winter. (She had taught
herself to dance in her wild fashion to help keep herself warm.) In 1919,
Josephine had run away and become a part-time vaudeville performer,
landing in New York two years later without money or connections. She
had had some success as a clowning chorus girl, providing comic relief with
her crossed eyes and screwed-up face, but she hadn't stood out. Then she
was invited to Paris. Some other black performers had declined, fearing
things might be still worse for them in France than in America, but
Josephine jumped at the chance.
Despite her success with the Revue Nègre, Josephine did not delude
herself: Parisians were notoriously fickle. She decided to turn the relation-
ship around. First, she refused to be aligned with any club, and developed a
reputation for breaking contracts at will, making it clear that she was ready
to leave in an instant. Since childhood she had been afraid of dependence
on anyone; now no one could take her for granted. This only made impre-
sarios chase her and the public appreciate her the more. Second, she was
aware that although black culture had become the vogue, what the French
had fallen in love with was a kind of caricature. If that was what it took
to be successful, so be it, but Josephine made it clear that she did not take
the caricature seriously; instead she reversed it, becoming the ultimate
