Create Temptation • 235
liance with England by marrying his daughter to the son of the English
king, James I. James seemed open to the idea, but he stalled for time.
Spain's ambassador to the English court, a man called Gondomar, was given
the task of advancing Philip's plan. He set his sights on the king's favorite,
the Duke (former Earl) of Buckingham.
Gondomar knew the duke's main weakness: vanity. Buckingham hun-
gered for the glory and adventure that would add to his fame; he was bored
with his limited tasks, and he pouted and whined about this. The ambas-
sador first flattered him profusely—the duke was the ablest man in the
country and it was a shame he was given so little to do. Then, he began to
whisper to him of a great adventure. The duke, as Gondomar knew, was in
favor of the match with the Spanish princess, but these damned marriage
negotiations with King James were taking so long, and getting nowhere.
What if the duke were to accompany the king's son, his good friend Prince
Charles, to Spain? Of course, this would have to be done in secret, without
guards or escorts, for the English government and its ministers would never
sanction such a trip. But that would make it all the more dangerous and ro-
mantic. Once in Madrid, the prince could throw himself at Princess
Maria's feet, declare his undying love, and carry her back to England in tri-
umph. What a chivalrous deed it would be and all for love. The duke
would get all the credit and it would make his name famous for centuries.
The duke fell for the idea, and convinced Charles to go along; after
much arguing, they also convinced a reluctant King James. The trip was a
near disaster (Charles would have had to convert to Catholicism to win
Maria), and the marriage never happened, but Gondomar had done his job.
He did not bribe the duke with offers of money or power—he aimed at
the childlike part of him that never grew up. A child has little power to re-
sist. It wants everything, now, and rarely thinks of the consequences. A
child lies lurking in everyone—a pleasure that was denied them, a desire
that was repressed. Hit at that point, tempt them with the proper toy (ad-
venture, money, fun), and they will slough off their normal adult reason-
ableness. Recognize their weakness by whatever childlike behavior they
reveal in daily life—it is the tip of the iceberg.
Napoleon Bonaparte was appointed the supreme general of the French
army in 1796. His commission was to defeat the Austrian forces that had
taken over northern Italy. The obstacles were immense: Napoleon was only
twenty-six at the time; the generals below him were envious of his position
and doubtful of his abilities. His soldiers were tired, underfed, underpaid,
and grumpy. How could he motivate this group to fight the highly experi-
enced Austrian army? As he prepared to cross the Alps into Italy, Napoleon
gave a speech to his troops that may have been the turning point in his ca-
reer, and in his life: "Soldiers, you are half starved and half naked. The gov-
ernment owes you much, but can do nothing for you. Your patience, your
courage, do you honor, but give you no glory. ... I will lead you into the
most fertile plains of the world. There you will find flourishing cities,
teeming provinces. There you will reap honor, glory, and wealth." Thewanted. . . . • Now, one
day, when Masetto
happened to he taking a
rest after a spell of
strenuous work, he was
approached by two very
young nuns who were out
walking in the garden.
Since he gave them the
impression that he was
asleep, they began to stare
at him, and the bolder of
the two said to her
companion: • "If I could
be sure that you would
keep it a secret, I would
tell you about an idea that
has often crossed my mind,
and one that might well
work out to our mutual
benefit." • "Do tell me,"
replied the other. "You can
be quite certain that I
shan't talk about it to
anyone. " • The bold one
began to speak more
plainly. • "I wonder," she
said, "whether you have
ever considered what a
strict life we have to lead,
and how the only men who
ever dare set foot in this
place are the steward, who
is elderly, and this dumb
gardener of ours. Yet I have
often heard it said, by
several of the ladies who
have come to visit us, that
all other pleasures in the
world are mere trifles by
comparison with the one
experienced by a woman
when she goes with a man.
I have thus been thinking,
since I have nobody else to
hand, that I would like to
discover with the aid of this
dumb fellow whether they
are telling the truth. As it
happens, there couldn't be
a better man for the
purpose, because even if he
wanted to let the cat out of
the bag, he wouldn't be
able to. He wouldn't even
know how to explain, for
you can see for yourself
what a mentally retarded,
dim-witted hulk of a youth
236 • The Art of Seduction
speech had a powerful effect. Days later these same soldiers, after a rough
climb over the mountains, gazed down on the Piedmont valley. Napoleon s
words echoed in their ears, and a ragged, grumbling gang became an
inspired army that would sweep across northern Italy in pursuit of the
Austrians.
Napoleon's use of temptation had two elements: behind you is a grim
past; ahead of you is a future of wealth and glory, if you follow me. Integral
to the temptation strategy is a clear demonstration that the target has noth-
ing to lose and everything to gain. The present offers little hope, the future
can be full of pleasure and excitement. Remember to keep the future gains
vague, though, and somewhat out of reach. Be too specific and you will
disappoint; make the promise too close at hand, and you will not be able to
postpone satisfaction long enough to get what you want.
The barriers and tensions in temptation are there to stop people from
giving in too easily and too superficially. You want them to struggle, to
resist, to be anxious. Queen Victoria surely fell in love with her prime
minister, Benjamin Disraeli, but there were barriers of religion (he was a
dark-skinned Jew), class (she, of course, was a queen), social taste (she was
a paragon of virtue, he a notorious dandy). The relationship was never
consummated, but what deliciousness those barriers gave to their daily en-
counters, which were full of constant flirtation.
Many such social barriers are gone today, so they have to be
manufactured—it is the only way to put spice into seduction. Taboos of
any kind are a source of tension, and they are psychological now, not reli-
gious. You are looking for some repression, some secret desire that will
make your victim squirm uncomfortably if you hit upon it, but will tempt
them all the more. Search in their past; whatever they seem to fear or flee
from might hold the key. It could be a yearning for a mother or father fig-
ure, or a latent homosexual desire. Perhaps you can satisfy that desire by
presenting yourself as a masculine woman or a feminine man. For others
you play the Lolita, or the daddd—someone they are not supposed to have,
the dark side of their personality. Keep the connection vague—you want
them to reach for something elusive, something that comes out of their
own mind.
In London in 1769, Casanova met a young woman named Charpillon.
She was much younger than he, as beautiful a woman as he had ever
known, and with a reputation for destroying men. In one of their first en-
counters she told him straight out that he would fall for her and she would
ruin him. To everyone's disbelief, Casanova pursued her. In each encounter
she hinted she might give in—perhaps the next time, if he was nice to her.
She inflamed his curiosity—what pleasure she would yield; he would be
the first, he would tame her. "The venom of desire penetrated my whole
being so completely," he later wrote, "that had she so wished it, she could
have despoiled me of everything I possessed. I would have beggared myself
for one little kiss." This "affair" indeed proved his ruin; she humiliated him.
Charpillon had rightly gauged that Casanova's primary weakness was histhe fellow is. I would be
glad to know what you
think of the idea." •
"Dear me!" said the other.
"Don't you realize that we
have promised God to
preserve our virginity?" •
"Pah!" she said. "We are
constantly making Him
promises that we never
keep! What does it matter
if we fail to keep this
one? He can always
find other girls to preserve
their virginity for Him. " •
. . . Before the time came
for them to leave, they had
each made repeated trials of
the dumb fellow's riding
ability, and later on, when
they were busily swapping
tales about it all, they
agreed that it was every bit
as pleasant an experience
as they had been led to
believe, indeed more so.
And from then on,
whenever the opportunity
arose, they whiled away
many a pleasant hour in
the dumb fellow's arms. •
One day, however, a
companion of theirs
happened to look out from
the window of her cell, saw
the goings-on, and drew
the attention of two others
to what was afoot. Having
talked the matter over
between themselves, they at
first decided to report the
pair to the abbess. But then
they changed their minds,
and by common agreement
with the other two, they
took up shares in Masetto 's
holding. And because of
various indiscretions, these
five were subsequently
joined by the remaining
three, one after the other. •
Finally, the abbess, who
was still unaware of all
this, was taking a stroll one
very hot day in the garden,
all by herself when she
came across Masetto
stretched out fast asleep in
the shade of an almond
