Isolate the Victim • 313
into your world, the weaker they become. As with the king of Wu, by the
time they realize what has happened, it is too late.
Isolation—The "Only You" Effect
In 1948, the twenty-nine-year-old actress Rita Hayworth, known as
Hollywood's Love Goddess, was at a low point in her life. Her marriage
to Orson Welles was breaking up, her mother had died, and her career
seemed stalled. That summer she headed for Europe. Welles was in Italy at
the time, and in the back of her mind she was dreaming of a reconciliation.
Rita stopped first at the French Riviera. Invitations poured in, particu-
larly from wealthy men, for at the time she was considered the most beauti-
ful woman in the world. Aristotle Onassis and the Shah of Iran telephoned
her almost daily, begging for a date. She turned them all down. A few days
after her arrival, though, she received an invitation from Elsa Maxwell, the
society hostess, who was giving a little party in Cannes. Rita balked but
Maxwell insisted, telling her to buy a new dress, show up a little late, and
make a grand entrance.
Rita played along, and arrived at the party wearing a white Grecian
gown, her red hair falling over her bare shoulders. She was greeted by a re-
action she had grown used to: all conversation stopped as both men and
women turned in their chairs, the men gazing in amazement, the women
jealous. A man hurried to her side and escorted her to her table. It was
thirty-seven-year-old Prince Aly Khan, the son of the Aga Khan III, who
was the worldwide leader of the Islamic Ismaili sect and one of the richest
men in the world. Rita had been warned about Aly Khan, a notorious rake.
To her dismay, they were seated next to each other, and he never left her
side. He asked her a million questions—about Hollywood, her interests, on
and on. She began to relax a little and open up. There were other beautiful
women there, princesses, actresses, but Aly Khan ignored them all, acting as
if Rita were the only woman there. He led her onto the dance floor, and
though he was an expert dancer, she felt uncomfortable—he held her a lit-
tle too close. Still, when he offered to drive her back to her hotel, she
agreed. They sped along the Grande Corniche; it was a beautiful night. For
one evening she had managed to forget her many problems, and she was
grateful, but she was still in love with Welles, and an affair with a rake like
Aly Khan was not what she needed.
Aly Khan had to fly off on business for a few days; he begged her to
stay at the Riviera until he got back. While he was away, he telephoned
constantly. Every morning a giant bouquet of flowers arrived. On the tele-
phone he seemed particularly annoyed that the Shah of Iran was trying
hard to see her, and he made her promise to break the date to which she
had finally agreed. During this time, a gypsy fortune-teller visited the hotel,
and Rita agreed to have her fortune read. "You are about to embark on theIn Cairo Aly bumped into
[the singer] Juliette Greco
again. He asked her to
dance. • "You have too bad
a reputation," she replied.
"We're going to sit very
much apart. " • "What are
you doing tomorrow?" he
insisted. • "Tomorrow I
take a plane to Beirut." •
When she boarded the
plane, Aly was already
on it, grinning at her
surprise. ...• Dressed in
tight black leather slacks
and a black sweater
[Greco] stretched
languorously in an
armchair of her Paris house
and observed: • "They say
I am a dangerous woman.
Well, Aly was a dangerous
man. He was charming in
a very special way. There is
a kind of man who is very
clever with women. He
takes you out to a
restaurant and if the most
beautiful woman comes in,
he doesn't look at her. He
makes you feel you are a
queen. Of course, I
understood it. I didn 't
believe it. I would laugh
and point out the
beautiful woman. But that
is me. . . . Most women
are made very happy by
that kind of attention. It's
pure vanity. She thinks,
'I'll be the one and the
others will leave.'
• "... With Aly, how
the woman felt was most
important. . . . He was a
great charmer, a great
seducer. He made you feel
fine and that everything
was easy. No problems.
Nothing to worry about.
Or regret. It was always,
'What can I do for you?
What do you need?'
Airplane tickets, cars,
boats; you felt you were on
a pink cloud."
—LEONARD SLATER,
ALY: A BIOGRAPHY
314 • The Art of Seduction
greatest romance of your life," the gypsy told her. "He is somebody you al-
ready know. . . . You must relent and give in to him totally. Only if you do
that will you find happiness at long last." Not knowing who this man could
be, Rita, who had a weakness for the occult, decided to extend her stay.
Aly Khan came back; he told her that his château overlooking the Mediter-
ranean was the perfect place to escape from the press and forget her trou-
bles, and that he would behave himself. She relented. Life in the château
was like a fairy tale; wherever she turned, his Indian helpers were there to
attend to her every wish. At night he would take her into his enormous
ballroom, where they would dance all by themselves. Could this be the
man the fortune-teller meant?
Aly Khan invited his friends over to meet her. Among this strange
company she felt alone again, and depressed; she decided to leave the
château. Just then, as if he had read her thoughts, Aly Khan whisked her off
to Spain, the country that fascinated her most. The press caught on to the
affair, and began to hound them in Spain: Rita had had a daughter with
Welles—was this any way for a mother to act? Aly Khan's reputation did
not help, but he stood by her, shielding her from the press as best he could.
Now she was more alone than ever, and more dependent on him.
Near the end of the trip, Aly Khan proposed to Rita. She turned him
down; she did not think he was the kind of man you married. He followed
her to Hollywood, where her former friends were less friendly than be-
fore. Thank God she had Aly Khan to help her. A year later she finally
succumbed, abandoning her career, moving to Aly Khan's château, and
marrying him.
Interpretation. Aly Khan, like a lot of men, fell in love with Rita Hay-
worth the moment he saw the film Gilda, in 1948. He made up his mind
that he would seduce her somehow. The moment he heard she was coming
to the Riviera, he got his friend Elsa Maxwell to lure her to the party and
seat her next to him. He knew about the breakup of her marriage, and
how vulnerable she was. His strategy was to block out everything else in
her world—problems, other men, suspicion of him and his motives, etc.
His campaign began with the display of an intense interest in her life—
constant phone calls, flowers, gifts, all to keep him in her mind. He set up
the fortune-teller to plant the seed. When she began to fall for him, he in-
troduced her to his friends, knowing she would feel alienated among them,
and therefore dependent on him. Her dependence was heightened by the
trip to Spain, where she was on unfamiliar territory, besieged by reporters,
and forced to cling to him for help. He slowly came to dominate her
thoughts. Everywhere she turned, there he was. Finally she succumbed, out
of weakness and the boost to her vanity that his attention represented. Un-
der his spell, she forgot about his horrid reputation, relinquishing the suspi-
cions that were the only thing protecting her from him.
It was not Aly Khan's wealth or looks that made him a great seducer.ANNE: Didst thou not kill
this king [Henry VI]? \
RICHARD: I grant ye. ... \
ANNE: And thou unfit for
any place, but hell. \
RICHARD: Yes, one place
else, if you will hear me
name it. \ ANNE: Some
dungeon. \ RICHARD:
Your bedchamber, \ ANNE:
Ill rest betide the chamber
where thou liest! \
RICHARD: So will it,
madam, till I lie with you.
. . . But gentle Lady
Anne . . . \ Is not the
causer of the timeless
deaths \ Of these
Plantagenets, Henry and
Edward, \ As blameful as
the executioner? \ ANNE:
Thou wast the cause and
most accursed effect. \
RICHARD: Your beauty
was the cause of that
effect— \ Your beauty, that
did haunt me in my sleep \
To undertake the death of
all the world, \ So I might
live one hour in your sweet
bosom.
—WILLIAM SHAKESPEARE,
THE TRAGEDY OF KING
RICHARD III
My child, my sister, dream
\ How sweet all things
would seem \ Were we in
that kind land to live
together, \And there love
slow and long, \ There love
and die among \ Those
scenes that image you, that
sumptuous weather. \
Drowned suns that
glimmer there \ Through
cloud-dishevelled air \
Move me with such a
mystery as appears \
Within those other skies \
Of your treacherous eyes \
When I behold them
shining through their tears.
\ There, there is nothing
else but grace and measure,
\ Richness, quietness, and
pleasure. . . . \ See,
