182 • The Art of Seduction
the power of indirection and no seducer can work his or her magic with-
out it.
The first move to master is simple: once you have chosen the right per-
son, you must make the target come to you. If, in the opening stages, you
can make your targets think that they are the ones making the first ap-
proach, you have won the game. There will be no resentment, no perverse
counterreaction, no paranoia.
To make them come to you requires giving them space. This can be
accomplished in several ways. You can haunt the periphery of their exis-
tence, letting them notice you in different places but never approaching
them. You will get their attention this way, and if they want to bridge the
gap, they will have to come to you. You can befriend them, as Lauzun did
the Grande Mademoiselle, moving steadily closer while always maintaining
the distance appropriate for friends of the opposite sex. You can also play
cat and mouse with them, first seeming interested, then stepping back—
actively luring them to follow you into your web. Whatever you do, and
whatever kind of seduction you are practicing, you must at all cost avoid
the natural tendency to crowd your targets. Do not make the mistake of
thinking they will lose interest unless you apply pressure, or that they will
enjoy a flood of attention. Too much attention early on will actually just
suggest insecurity, and raise doubts as to your motives. Worst of all, it gives
your targets no room for imagination. Take a step back; let the thoughts
you are provoking come to them as if they were their own. This is doubly
important if you are dealing with someone who has a deep effect on you.
We can never really understand the opposite sex. They are always mys-
terious to us, and it is this mystery that provides the tension so delightful in
seduction; but it is also a source of unease. Freud famously wondered what
women really wanted; even to this most insightful of psychological
thinkers, the opposite sex was a foreign land. For both men and women,
there are deep-rooted feelings of fear and anxiety in relation to the oppo-
site sex. In the initial stages of a seduction, then, you must find ways to
calm any sense of mistrust that the other person may experience. (A sense
of danger and fear can heighten the seduction later on, but if you stir such
emotions in the first stages, you will more likely scare the target away.) Es-
tablish a neutral distance, seem harmless, and you give yourself room to
move. Casanova cultivated a slight femininity in his character—an interest
in clothes, theater, domestic matters—that young girls found comforting.
The Renaissance courtesan Tullia d'Aragona, developing friendships with the
great thinkers and poets of her time, talked of literature and philosophy—
anything but the boudoir (and anything but the money that was also her
goal). Johannes, the narrator of Søren Kierkegaard's The Seducer's Diary, fol-
lows his target, Cordelia, from a distance; when their paths cross, he is po-
lite and apparently shy. As Cordelia gets to know him, he doesn't frighten
her. In fact he is so innocuous she begins to wish he were less so.
Duke Ellington, the great jazz artist and a consummate seducer, wouldof simulacra of Gomorra.
The seducer is nothing
more than a lesbian."
—FRÉDÉRIC MONNEYRON,
SÉDUIRE: L'IMAGINAIRE DE LA
SÉDUCTION DE DON GIOVANNI
À MICK JAGGER
As he [Jupiter] was
hurrying busily to and fro,
he stopped short at the
sight of an Arcadian
maiden. The fire of
passion kindled the very
marrow of his bones. This
girl was not one who spent
her time in spinning soft
fibers of wool, or in
arranging her hair in
different styles. She was
one of Diana's warriors,
wearing her tunic pinned
together with a brooch, her
tresses carelessly caught
back by a white ribbon,
and carrying in her hand a
light javelin or her
bow. . . . • The sun on
high had passed its zenith,
when she entered a grove
whose trees had never felt
the axe. Here she took her
quiver from her shoulders,
unstrung her pliant bow,
and lay down on the
turf, resting her head on
her painted quiver. When
Jupiter saw her thus, tired
and unprotected, he
said: "Here is a secret of
which my wife will know
nothing; or if she does get
to know of it, it will be
worth her reproaches!" •
Without wasting time he
assumed the appearance
and the dress of Diana,
and spoke to the girl.
'Dearest of all my
companions," he said,
"where have you been
hunting? On what
mountain ridges?" She
raised herself from the
grass: "Greeting, divine
mistress," she cried,
"greater in my sight than
Create a False Sense of Security—Approach Indirectly • 183
initially dazzle the ladies with his good looks, stylish clothing, and cha-
risma. But once he was alone with a woman, he would take a slight step
back, becoming excessively polite, making only small talk. Banal conversa-
tion can be a brilliant tactic; it hypnotizes the target. The dullness of your
front gives the subtlest suggestive word, the slightest look, an amplified
power. Never mention love and you make its absence speak volumes—your
victims will wonder why you never discuss your emotions, and as they have
such thoughts, they will go further, imagining what else is going on in your
mind. They will be the ones to bring up the topic of love or affection. De-
liberate dullness has many applications. In psychotherapy, the doctor makes
monosyllabic responses to draw patients in, making them relax and open
up. In international negotiations, Henry Kissinger would lull diplomats
with boring details, then strike with bold demands. Early in a seduction,
less-colorful words are often more effective than vivid ones—the target
tunes them out, looks at your face, begins to imagine, fantasize, fall under
your spell.
Getting to your targets through other people is extremely effective; in-
filtrate their circle and you are no longer a stranger. Before the seventeenth-
century seducer Count de Grammont made a move, he would befriend his
target's chambermaid, her valet, a friend, even a lover. In this way he could
gather information, finding a way to approach her in an unthreatening
manner. He could also plant ideas, saying things the third party was likely
to repeat, things that would intrigue the lady, particularly when they came
from someone she knew.
Ninon de l'Enclos, the seventeenth-century courtesan and strategist of
seduction, believed that disguising one's intentions was not only a necessity,
it added to the pleasure of the game. A man should never declare his feel-
ings, she felt, particularly early on. It is irritating and provokes mistrust. "A
woman is much better persuaded that she is loved by what she guesses than
by what she is told," Ninon once remarked. Often a person's haste in de-
claring his or her feelings comes from a false desire to please, thinking this
will flatter the other. But the desire to please can annoy and offend. Chil-
dren, cats, and coquettes draw us to them by apparently not trying, even by
seeming uninterested. Learn to disguise your feelings and let people figure
out what is happening for themselves.
In all arenas of life, you should never give the impression that you are
angling for something—that will raise a resistance that you will never lower.
Learn to approach people from the side. Mute your colors, blend in, seem
unthreatening, and you will have more room to maneuver later on. The
same holds true in politics, where overt ambition often frightens people.
Vladimir Ilyich Lenin at first glance looked like an everyday Russian; he
dressed like a worker, spoke with a peasant accent, had no air of greatness.
This made the public feel comfortable and identify with him. Yet beneath
this apparently bland appearance, of course, was a deeply clever man who
was always maneuvering. By the time people realized this it was too late.Jove himself—I care not
if he hears me!" Jove
laughed to hear her words.
Delighted to be preferred to
himself, he kissed her—not
with the restraint becoming
to a maiden's kisses: and
as she began to tell of her
hunting exploits in the
forest, he prevented her by
his embrace, and betrayed
his real self by a shameful
action. So far from
complying, she resisted
him as far as a woman
could . . . but how could a
girl overcome a man, and
who could defeat Jupiter?
He had his way, and
returned to the upper air.
—OVID, METAMORPHOSES,
TRANSLATED BY MARY M. INNES
I had rather hear my dog
bark at a crow than a man
swear he loves me.
—BEATRICE, IN WILLIAM
SHAKESPEARE, MUCH ADO
ABOUT NOTHING
I know of a man whose
beloved was completely
friendly and at ease with
him; but if he had
disclosed by the least
gesture that he was in love,
the beloved would have
become as remote from
him as the Pleiades, whose
stars hang so high in
heaven. It is a sort of
statesmanship that is
required in such cases; the
party concerned was
enjoying the pleasure of his
loved one's company
intensely and to the last
degree, but if he had so
much as hinted at his inner
feelings he would have
attained but a miserable
fraction of the beloved's
favor, and endured into the
bargain all the arrogance
