Create a Need—Stir Anxiety and Discontent • 207
they wondered why he was doing this, and felt he was unfair; with the
other half, they believed it was all true. Then, in those moments of self-
doubt, they would get a letter or a visit from him in which he was his old
charming self.
Now they saw him differently Now they were weak and vulnerable, in
need of something; and he would seem so strong. Now he drew them to
him, feelings of friendship turning into affection and desire. Once they felt
uncertain about themselves, they were susceptible to falling in love.
Most of us protect ourselves from the harshness of life by succumbing
to routines and patterns, by closing ourselves off from others. But underly-
ing these habits is a tremendous sense of insecurity and defensiveness. We
feel we are not really living. The seducer must pick at this wound and bring
these semiconscious thoughts into full awareness. This was what Lawrence
did: his sudden, brutally unexpected jabs would hit people at their weak
spot.
Although Lawrence had great success with his frontal approach, it is
often better to stir thoughts of inadequacy and uncertainty indirectly, by
hinting at comparisons to yourself or to others, and by insinuating some-
how that your victims' lives are less grand than they had imagined. You
want them to feel at war with themselves, torn in two directions, and anx-
ious about it. Anxiety, a feeling of lack and need, is the precursor of all de-
sire. These jolts in the victim's mind create space for you to insinuate your
poison, the siren call of adventure or fulfillment that will make them follow
you into your web. Without anxiety and a sense of lack there can be no
seduction.
Desire and love have for their object things or qualities
which a man does not at present possess but which he
lacks.
—SOCRATES
Keys to Seduction
Everyone wears a mask in society; we pretend to be more sure of our-
selves than we are. We do not want other people to glimpse that
doubting self within us. In truth, our egos and personalities are much more
fragile than they appear to be; they cover up feelings of confusion and
emptiness. As a seducer, you must never mistake a person's appearance for
the reality. People are always susceptible to being seduced, because in fact
everyone lacks a sense of completeness, feels something missing deep in-
side. Bring their doubts and anxieties to the surface and they can be led and
lured to follow you.
No one can see you as someone to follow or fall in love with unless
they first reflect on themselves somehow, and on what they are missing. Be-
fore the seduction proceeds, you must place a mirror in front of them inson, he schemes to get for
himself whatever is
beautiful and good; he is
bold and forward and
strenuous, always devising
tricks like a cunning
huntsman."
—PLATO, SYMPOSIUM,
TRANSLATED BY WALTER
HAMILTON
We are all like pieces of the
coins that children break in
half for keepsakes—
making two out of one,
like the flatfish—and each
of us is forever seeking the
half that will tally with
himself . . . And so all
this to-do is a relic of that
original state of ours when
we were whole, and now,
when we are longing for
and following after that
primeval wholeness, we say
we are in love.
—ARISTOPHANES'S SPEECH IN
PLATO'S SYMPOSIUM, QUOTED IN
JAMES MANDRELL, DON JUAN
AND THE POINT OF HONOR
Don John: Well met,
pretty lass! What! Are
there such handsome
Creatures as you amongst
these Fields, these Trees,
and Rocks? • Charlotta: I
am as you see, Sir. • Don
John: Are you of this
Village? • Charlotta: Yes,
Sir. • Don John: What's
your name? • Charlotta:
Charlotta, Sir, at your
Service. • Don John: Ah
what a fine Person 'tis!
What piercing Eyes! •
Charlotta: Sir, you make
me ashamed. . . . • Don
John: Pretty Charlotta,
you are not marry'd, are
you? • Charlotta: No, Sir,
but I am soon to be, with
Pierrot, son to Goody
Simonetta. • Don John:
What! Shou'd such a one
as you be Wife to a
208 • The Art of Seduction
which they glimpse that inner emptiness. Made aware of a lack, they now
can focus on you as the person who can fill that empty space. Remember:
most of us are lazy. To relieve our feelings of boredom or inadequacy on
our own takes too much effort; letting someone else do the job is both
easier and more exciting. The desire to have someone fill up our emptiness
is the weakness on which all seducers prey. Make people anxious about the
future, make them depressed, make them question their identity, make
them sense the boredom that gnaws at their life. The ground is prepared.
The seeds of seduction can be sown.
In Plato's dialogue Symposium—the West's oldest treatise on love, and a
text that has had a determining influence on our ideas of desire—the cour-
tesan Diotima explains to Socrates the parentage of Eros, the god of love.
Eros's father was Contrivance, or Cunning, and his mother was Poverty, or
Need. Eros takes after his parents: he is constantly in need, which he is con-
stantly contriving to fill. As the god of love, he knows that love cannot be
induced in another person unless they too feel need. And that is what his
arrows do: piercing people's flesh, they make them feel a lack, an ache, a
hunger. This is the essence of your task as a seducer. Like Eros, you must
create a wound in your victim, aiming at their soft spot, the chink in their
self-esteem. If they are stuck in a rut, make them feel it more deeply, "in-
nocently" bringing it up and talking about it. What you want is a wound,
an insecurity you can expand a little, an anxiety that can best be relieved by
involvement with another person, namely you. They must feel the wound
before they fall in love. Notice how Lawrence stirred anxiety, always hitting
at his victims' weak spot: for Jessie Chambers, her physical coldness; for Ivy
Low, her lack of spontaneity; for Middleton-Murry, his lack of gallantry.
Cleopatra got Julius Caesar to sleep with her the first night he met her,
but the real seduction, the one that made him her slave, began later. In their
ensuing conversations she talked repeatedly of Alexander the Great, the
hero from whom she was supposedly descended. No one could compare to
him. By implication, Caesar was made to feel inferior. Understanding that
beneath his bravado Caesar was insecure, Cleopatra awakened in him an
anxiety, a hunger to prove his greatness. Once he felt this way he was easily
further seduced. Doubts about his masculinity was his tender spot.
When Caesar was assassinated, Cleopatra turned her sights on Mark
Antony, one of Caesar's successors in the leadership of Rome. Antony
loved pleasure and spectacle, and his tastes were crude. She appeared to him
first on her royal barge, then wined and dined and banqueted him. Every-
thing was geared to suggest to him the superiority of the Egyptian way of
life over the Roman, at least when it came to pleasure. The Romans were
boring and unsophisticated by comparison. And once Antony was made to
feel how much he was missing in spending his time with his dull soldiers
and his matronly Roman wife, he could be made to see Cleopatra as the in-
carnation of all that was exciting. He became her slave.
This is the lure of the exotic. In your role of seducer, try to position
yourself as coming from outside, as a stranger of sorts. You representPeasant! No, no; that's a
profanation of so much
Beauty. You was not born
to live in a Village. You
certainly deserve a better
Fortune, and Heaven,
which knows it well,
brought me hither on
purpose to hinder this
Marriage and do justice to
your Charms; for in short,
fair Charlotta, I love you
with all my Heart, and if
you'll consent I'll deliver
you from this miserable
Place, and put you in the
Condition you deserve.
This Love is doubtless
sudden, but 'tis an Effect of
your great Beauty. I love
you as much in a quarter of
an Hour as I shou'd
another in six Months.
—MOLIÈRE, DON JOHN; OR,
THE LIBERTINE, TRANSLATED BY
JOHN OZELL, IN OSCAR
MANDEL, ED., THE THEATRE OF
DON JUAN
For I stand tonight facing
west on what was once the
last frontier. From the
lands that stretch three
thousand miles behind me,
the pioneers of old gave up
their safety, their comfort,
and sometimes their lives to
build a new world here in
the West. They were not
the captives of their own
doubts, the prisoners of
their own price tags. Their
motto was not "every man
for himself—but "all for
the common cause." They
were determined to make
that new world strong and
free, to overcome its
hazards and its hardships,
to conquer the enemies that
threatened from without
and within. . . . • Today
some would say that those
struggles are all over—that
all the horizons have been
explored, that all the
battles have been won, that
there is no longer an
