236 • The Art of Seduction
speech had a powerful effect. Days later these same soldiers, after a rough
climb over the mountains, gazed down on the Piedmont valley. Napoleon s
words echoed in their ears, and a ragged, grumbling gang became an
inspired army that would sweep across northern Italy in pursuit of the
Austrians.
Napoleon's use of temptation had two elements: behind you is a grim
past; ahead of you is a future of wealth and glory, if you follow me. Integral
to the temptation strategy is a clear demonstration that the target has noth-
ing to lose and everything to gain. The present offers little hope, the future
can be full of pleasure and excitement. Remember to keep the future gains
vague, though, and somewhat out of reach. Be too specific and you will
disappoint; make the promise too close at hand, and you will not be able to
postpone satisfaction long enough to get what you want.
The barriers and tensions in temptation are there to stop people from
giving in too easily and too superficially. You want them to struggle, to
resist, to be anxious. Queen Victoria surely fell in love with her prime
minister, Benjamin Disraeli, but there were barriers of religion (he was a
dark-skinned Jew), class (she, of course, was a queen), social taste (she was
a paragon of virtue, he a notorious dandy). The relationship was never
consummated, but what deliciousness those barriers gave to their daily en-
counters, which were full of constant flirtation.
Many such social barriers are gone today, so they have to be
manufactured—it is the only way to put spice into seduction. Taboos of
any kind are a source of tension, and they are psychological now, not reli-
gious. You are looking for some repression, some secret desire that will
make your victim squirm uncomfortably if you hit upon it, but will tempt
them all the more. Search in their past; whatever they seem to fear or flee
from might hold the key. It could be a yearning for a mother or father fig-
ure, or a latent homosexual desire. Perhaps you can satisfy that desire by
presenting yourself as a masculine woman or a feminine man. For others
you play the Lolita, or the daddd—someone they are not supposed to have,
the dark side of their personality. Keep the connection vague—you want
them to reach for something elusive, something that comes out of their
own mind.
In London in 1769, Casanova met a young woman named Charpillon.
She was much younger than he, as beautiful a woman as he had ever
known, and with a reputation for destroying men. In one of their first en-
counters she told him straight out that he would fall for her and she would
ruin him. To everyone's disbelief, Casanova pursued her. In each encounter
she hinted she might give in—perhaps the next time, if he was nice to her.
She inflamed his curiosity—what pleasure she would yield; he would be
the first, he would tame her. "The venom of desire penetrated my whole
being so completely," he later wrote, "that had she so wished it, she could
have despoiled me of everything I possessed. I would have beggared myself
for one little kiss." This "affair" indeed proved his ruin; she humiliated him.
Charpillon had rightly gauged that Casanova's primary weakness was histhe fellow is. I would be
glad to know what you
think of the idea." •
"Dear me!" said the other.
"Don't you realize that we
have promised God to
preserve our virginity?" •
"Pah!" she said. "We are
constantly making Him
promises that we never
keep! What does it matter
if we fail to keep this
one? He can always
find other girls to preserve
their virginity for Him. " •
. . . Before the time came
for them to leave, they had
each made repeated trials of
the dumb fellow's riding
ability, and later on, when
they were busily swapping
tales about it all, they
agreed that it was every bit
as pleasant an experience
as they had been led to
believe, indeed more so.
And from then on,
whenever the opportunity
arose, they whiled away
many a pleasant hour in
the dumb fellow's arms. •
One day, however, a
companion of theirs
happened to look out from
the window of her cell, saw
the goings-on, and drew
the attention of two others
to what was afoot. Having
talked the matter over
between themselves, they at
first decided to report the
pair to the abbess. But then
they changed their minds,
and by common agreement
with the other two, they
took up shares in Masetto 's
holding. And because of
various indiscretions, these
five were subsequently
joined by the remaining
three, one after the other. •
Finally, the abbess, who
was still unaware of all
this, was taking a stroll one
very hot day in the garden,
all by herself when she
came across Masetto
stretched out fast asleep in
the shade of an almond
Create Temptation • 237
need for conquest, to overcome challenge, to taste what no other man had
tasted. Beneath this was a kind of masochism, a pleasure in the pain a
woman could give him. Playing the impossible woman, enticing and then
frustrating him, she offered the ultimate temptation. What will often do the
trick is to give the target the sense that you are a challenge, a prize to be
won. In possessing you they will get what no other has had. They may even
get pain; but pain is close to pleasure, and offers its own temptations.
In the Old Testament we read that "David arose from his couch and
was walking upon the roof of the king's house . . . [and] he saw from the
roof a woman bathing; and the woman was very beautiful." The woman
was Bathsheba. David summoned her, seduced her (supposedly), then pro-
ceeded to get rid of her husband, Uriah, in battle. In fact, however, it was
Bathsheba who had seduced David. She bathed on her roof at an hour
when she knew he would be standing on his balcony. After tempting a man
she knew had a weakness for women, she played the coquette, forcing him
to come after her. This is the opportunity strategy: give someone weak the
chance to have what they lust after by merely placing yourself within their
reach, as if by accident. Temptation is often a matter of timing, of crossing
the path of the weak at the right moment, giving them the opportunity to
surrender.
Bathsheba used her entire body as a lure, but it is often more effective
to use only a part of the body, creating a fetishlike effect. Madame Re-
camier would let you glimpse her body beneath the sheer dresses she wore,
but only briefly, when she took off her overgarment to dance. Men would
leave that evening dreaming of what little they had seen. Empress Josephine
made a point of baring her beautiful arms in public. Give the target only a
part of you to fantasize about, thereby creating a constant temptation in
their mind.tree. Too much riding by
night had left him with
very little strength for the
day's labors, and so there
he lay, with his clothes
ruffled up in front by the
wind, leaving him all
exposed. Finding herself
alone, the lady stood with
her eyes riveted to this
spectacle, and she was
seized by the same craving
to which her young charges
had already succumbed.
So, having roused Masetto,
she led him away to her
room, where she kept him
for several days, thus
provoking bitter complaints
from the nuns over the fact
that the handyman had
suspended work in the
garden. Before sending him
back to his own quarters,
she repeatedly savored the
one pleasure for which she
had always reserved her
most fierce disapproval,
and from then on she
demanded regular
supplementary allocations,
amounting to considerably
more than her fair share.
—GIOVANNI BOCCACCIO,
THE DECAMERON, TRANSLATED
BY G. H. MCWILLIAM
Symbol:
The Apple in the Garden
of Eden. The fruit looks deeply
inviting, and you are not supposed to
eat of it; it is forbidden. But that is pre-
cisely why you think of it day and night.
You see it but cannot have it. And the
only way to get rid of this tempta-
tion is to yield and taste
the fruit.
