224 • The Art of Seduction
against people, as if they were stone walls. But instead of complaining
about how misunderstood or ignored you are, why not try something dif-
ferent: instead of seeing other people as spiteful or indifferent, instead of
trying to figure out why they act the way they do, look at them through
the eyes of the seducer. The way to lure people out of their natural in-
tractability and self-obsession is to enter their spirit.
All of us are narcissists. When we were children our narcissism was
physical: we were interested in our own image, our own body, as if it were
a separate being. As we grow older, our narcissism grows more psychologi-
cal: we become absorbed in our own tastes, opinions, experiences. A hard
shell forms around us. Paradoxically, the way to entice people out of this
shell is to become more like them, in fact a kind of mirror image of them.
You do not have to spend days studying their minds; simply conform to
their moods, adapt to their tastes, play along with whatever they send your
way. In doing so you will lower their natural defensiveness. Their sense of
self-esteem does not feel threatened by your strangeness or different habits.
People truly love themselves, but what they love most of all is to see their
ideas and tastes reflected in another person. This validates them. Their ha-
bitual insecurity vanishes. Hypnotized by their mirror image, they relax.
Now that their inner wall has crumbled, you can slowly draw them out,
and eventually turn the dynamic around. Once they are open to you, it be-
comes easy to infect them with your own moods and heat. Entering the
other person's spirit is a kind of hypnosis; it is the most insidious and effec-
tive form of persuasion known to man.
In the eighteenth-century Chinese novel The Dream of the Red Cham-
ber, all the young girls in the prosperous house of Chia are in love with the
rakish Pao Yu. He is certainly handsome, but what makes him irresistible is
his uncanny ability to enter a young girl's spirit. Pao Yu has spent his youth
around girls, whose company he has always preferred. As a result, he never
comes over as threatening and aggressive. He is granted entry to girls'
rooms, they see him everywhere, and the more they see him the more they
fall under his spell. It is not that Pao Yu is feminine; he remains a man, but
one who can be more or less masculine as the situation requires. His famil-
iarity with young girls allows him the flexibility to enter their spirit.
This is a great advantage. The difference between the sexes is what
makes love and seduction possible, but it also involves an element of fear
and distrust. A woman may fear male aggression and violence; a man is
often unable to enter a woman's spirit, and so he remains strange and
threatening. The greatest seducers in history, from Casanova to John F.
Kennedy, grew up surrounded by women and had a touch of femininity
themselves. The philosopher Søren Kierkegaard, in his novel The Seducer's
Diary, recommends spending more time with the opposite sex, getting to
know the "enemy" and its weaknesses, so that you can turn this knowledge
to your advantage.
Ninon de l'Enclos, one of the greatest seductresses who ever lived, had
definite masculine qualities. She could impress a man with her intensefrom an invisible vessel and
then drying them with an
invisible towel. When he
finished, the host called out
to his attendants: "Bring
in the table!" • Numerous
servants hurried in and out
of the hall, as though they
were preparing for a meal.
My brother could still see
nothing. Yet his host
invited him to sit at the
imaginary table, saying,
"Honor me by eating of
this meat." • The old man
moved his hands about as
though he were touching
invisible dishes, and also
moved his jaws and lips as
though he were chewing.
Then said he to
Shakashik: "Eat your fill,
my friend, for you must be
famished." • My brother
began to move his jaws, to
chew and swallow, as
though he were eating,
while the old man still
coaxed him, saying: "Eat,
my friend, and note the
excellence of this bread and
its whiteness. " • "This
man," thought Shakashik,
"must be fond of practical
jokes. " So he said, "It is,
sir, the whitest bread I have
ever seen, and I have never
tasted the like in all my
life. " • "This bread," said
the host, "was baked by a
slave girl whom I bought
for five hundred dinars."
Then he called out to one
of his slaves: "Bring in the
meat pudding, and let there
be plenty of fat in it!"
• ... Thereupon the host
moved his fingers as though
to pick up a morsel from an
imaginary dish, and
popped the invisible
delicacy into my brother's
mouth. • The old man
continued to enlarge upon
the excellences of the
various dishes, while my
brother became so
ravenously hungry that he
would have willingly died
Enter Their Spirit • 225
philosophical keenness, and charm him by seeming to share his interest in
politics and warfare. Many men first formed deep friendships with her,
only to later fall madly in love. The masculine in a woman is as soothing to
men as the feminine in a man is to women. To a man, a woman's strange-
ness can create frustration and even hostility. He may be lured into a sexual
encounter, but a longer-lasting spell cannot be created without an accom-
panying mental seduction. The key is to enter his spirit. Men are often
seduced by the masculine element in a woman's behavior or character.
In the novel Clarissa (1748) by Samuel Richardson, the young and de-
vout Clarissa Harlowe is being courted by the notorious rake Lovelace.
Clarissa knows Lovelace's reputation, but for the most part he has not acted
as she would expect: he is polite, seems a little sad and confused. At one
point she finds out that he has done a most noble and charitable deed to a
family in distress, giving the father money, helping the man's daughter get
married, giving them wholesome advice. At last Lovelace confesses to
Clarissa what she has suspected: he wants to repent, to change his ways. His
letters to her are emotional, almost religious in their passion. Perhaps she
will be the one to lead him to righteousness? But of course Lovelace has
trapped her: he is using the seducer's tactic of mirroring her tastes, in this
case her spirituality. Once she lets her guard down, once she believes she
can reform him, she is doomed: now he can slowly insinuate his own spirit
into his letters and encounters with her. Remember: the operative word is
"spirit," and that is often exactly where to take aim. By seeming to mirror
someone's spiritual values you can seem to establish a deep-rooted harmony
between the two of you, which can then be transferred to the physical
plane.
When Josephine Baker moved to Paris, in 1925, as part of an all-black
revue, her exoticism made her an overnight sensation. But the French are
notoriously fickle, and Baker sensed that their interest in her would quickly
pass to someone else. To seduce them for good, she entered their spirit. She
learned French and began to sing in it. She started dressing and acting as a
stylish French lady, as if to say that she preferred the French way of life to
the American. Countries are like people: they have vast insecurities, and
they feel threatened by other customs. It is often quite seductive to a people
to see an outsider adopting their ways. Benjamin Disraeli was born and
lived all his life in England, but he was Jewish by birth, and had exotic fea-
tures; the provincial English considered him an outsider. Yet he was more
English in his manners and tastes than many an Englishman, and this was
part of his charm, which he proved by becoming the leader of the Conser-
vative Party. Should you be an outsider (as most of us ultimately are), turn
it to advantage: play on your alien nature in such a way as to show the
group how deeply you prefer their tastes and customs to your own.
In 1752, the notorious rake Saltykov determined to be the first man in
the Russian court to seduce the twenty-three-year-old grand duchess, the
future Empress Catherine the Great. He knew that she was lonely; her hus-
band Peter ignored her, as did many of the other courtiers. And yet the ob-for a crust of barley bread.
• "Have you ever tasted
anything more delicious,"
went on the old man,
"than the spices in these
dishes?" • "Never,
indeed," replied
Shakashik. • "Eat
heartily, then," said his
host, "and do not be
ashamed!" • "I thank
you, sir," answered
Shakashik, "but I have
already eaten my fill. " •
Presently, however, the old
man clapped his hands
again and cried: "Bring in
the wine!" • . . . "Sir,"
said Shakashik, "your
generosity overwhelms
me!" He lifted the invisible
cup to his lips, and made
as if to drain it at one gulp.
• "Health and joy to
you!" exclaimed the old
man, as he pretended to
pour himself some wine
and drink it off. He
handed another cup to his
guest, and they both
continued to act in this
fashion until Shakashik,
feigning himself drunk,
began to roll his head from
side to side. Then, taking
his bounteous host
unawares, he suddenly
raised his arm so high that
the white of his armpit
could be seen, and dealt
him a blow on the neck
which made the hall echo
with the sound. And this
he followed by a second
blow. • The old man rose
in anger and cried: "What
are you doing, vile
creature?" • "Sir" replied
my brother, "you have
received your humble slave
into your house and loaded
him with your generosity;
you have fed him with the
choicest food and quenched
his thirst with the most
potent wines. Alas, he
became drunk, and forgot
his manners! But you are
so noble, sir, that you will
