The Rake • 21
fought a pistol duel over the duke, and one of them was seriously
wounded. The Duchess d'Orléans, Richelieu's most bitter enemy, once
wrote, "If I believed in sorcery I should think that the Duke possessed
some supernatural secret, for I have never known a woman to oppose the
very least resistance to him."
In seduction there is often a dilemma: to seduce you need planning and cal-
culation, but if your victim suspects that you have ulterior motives, she will
grow defensive. Furthermore, if you seem to be in control, you will inspire
fear instead of desire. The Ardent Rake solves this dilemma in the most art-
ful manner. Of course he must calculate and plan—he has to find a way
around the jealous husband, or whatever the obstacle is. It is exhausting
work. But by nature, the Ardent Rake also has the advantage of an uncon-
trollable libido. When he pursues a woman, he really is aglow with desire;
the victim senses this and is inflamed, even despite herself. How can she
imagine that he is a heartless seducer who will abandon her when he so ar-
dently braves all dangers and obstacles to get to her? And even if she is
aware of his rakish past, of his incorrigible amorality, it doesn't matter, be-
cause she also sees his weakness. He cannot control himself; he actually is a
slave to all women. As such he inspires no fear.
The Ardent Rake teaches us a simple lesson: intense desire has a dis-
tracting power on a woman, just as the Siren's physical presence does on a
man. A woman is often defensive and can sense insincerity or calculation.
But if she feels consumed by your attentions, and is confident you will do
anything for her, she will notice nothing else about you, or will find a way
to forgive your indiscretions. This is the perfect cover for a seducer. The
key is to show no hesitation, to abandon all restraint, to let yourself go, to
show that you cannot control yourself and are fundamentally weak. Do not
worry about inspiring mistrust; as long as you are the slave to her charms,
she will not think of the aftermath.
The Demonic Rake
In the early 1880s, members of Roman high society began to talk of a
young journalist who had arrived on the scene, a certain Gabriele D'An-
nunzio. This was strange in itself, for Italian royalty had only the deepest
contempt for anyone outside their circle, and a newspaper society reporter
was almost as low as you could go. Indeed well-born men paid D'Annun-
zio little attention. He had no money and few connections, coming from a
strictly middle-class background. Besides, to them he was downright
ugly—short and stocky, with a dark, splotchy complexion and bulging eyes.
The men thought him so unappealing they gladly let him mingle with their
wives and daughters, certain that their women would be safe with this gar-
goyle and happy to get this gossip hunter off their hands. No, it was not the
men who talked of D'Annunzio; it was their wives.wanted them, I expressed a
more eager desire; their
eyes lit up; my caresses
were returned; and it was
plain that their resistance
would not delay for more
than a few moments the
next scene I desired them
to play. I proposed that
each should accompany me
in turn into a charming
closet, next to the room in
which we were, which I
wanted them to admire.
They both remained silent.
• "You hesitate?" I said to
them. "I will see which of
you is the more attached
to me. The one who loves
me the more will be the
first to follow the lover she
wishes to convince of her
affection. . . ." • I knew
my puritan, and I was well
aware that, after a few
Struggles, she gave herself
up completely to the
present moment. 'This one
appeared to be as agreeable
to her as the others we had
previously spent together;
she forgot that she was
sharing me [with Madame
Renaud]. ...• [When
her turn came] Madame
Renaud responded with a
transport that proved her
contentment, and she left
the sitting only after having
repeated continually:
"What a man! What a
man! He is astonishing!
How often you could be
happy with him if he were
only faithful!"
—THE PRIVATE LIFE OF THE
MARSHAL DUKE OF RICHELIEU,
TRANSLATED BY F. S. FLINT
22 • The Art of Seduction
Introduced to D'Annunzio by their husbands, these duchesses and mar-
chionesses would find themselves entertaining this strange-looking man,
and when he was alone with them, his manner would suddenly change.
Within minutes these ladies would be spellbound. First, he had the most
magnificent voice they had ever heard—soft and low, each syllable articu-
lated, with a flowing rhythm and inflection that was almost musical. One
woman compared it to the ringing of church bells in the distance. Others
said his voice had a "hypnotic" effect. The words that voice spoke were in-
teresting as well—alliterative phrases, charming locutions, poetic images,
and a way of offering praise that could melt a woman's heart. D'Annunzio
had mastered the art of flattery. He seemed to know each woman's weak-
ness: one he would call a goddess of nature, another an incomparable artist
in the making, another a romantic figure out of a novel. A woman's heart
would flutter as he described the effect she had on him. Everything was
suggestive, hinting at sex or romance. That night she would ponder his
words, recalling little in particular that he had said, because he never said
anything concrete, but rather the feeling it had given her. The next day she
would receive from him a poem that seemed to have been written spe-
cifically for her. (In fact he wrote dozens of very similar poems, slightly
tailoring each one for its intended victim.)
A few years after D'Annunzio began work as a society reporter, he mar-
ried the daughter of the Duke and Duchess of Gallese. Shortly thereafter,
with the unshakeable support of society ladies, he began publishing novels
and books of poetry. The number of his conquests was remarkable, and
also the quality—not only marchionesses would fall at his feet, but great
artists, such as the actress Eleanor Duse, who helped him become a re-
spected dramatist and literary celebrity. The dancer Isadora Duncan, an-
other who eventually fell under his spell, explained his magic: "Perhaps the
most remarkable lover of our time is Gabriele D'Annunzio. And this
notwithstanding that he is small, bald, and, except when his face lights up
with enthusiasm, ugly But when he speaks to a woman he likes, his face is
transfigured, so that he suddenly becomes Apollo. . . . His effect on women
is remarkable. The lady he is talking to suddenly feels that her very soul and
being are lifted."
At the outbreak of World War I, the fifty-two-year-old D'Annunzio
joined the army. Although he had no military experience, he had a flair for
the dramatic and a burning desire to prove his bravery. He learned to fly
and led dangerous but highly effective missions. By the end of the war, he
was Italy's most decorated hero. His exploits made him a beloved national
figure, and after the war, crowds would gather outside his hotel wherever in
Italy he went. He would address them from a balcony, discussing politics,
railing against the current Italian government. A witness of one of these
speeches, the American writer Walter Starkie, was initially disappointed at
the appearance of the famous D'Annunzio on a balcony in Venice; he was
short, and looked grotesque. "Little by little, however, I began to sink under
the fascination of the voice, which penetrated into my consciousness. . . .His very successes in love,
even more than the
marvellous voice of this
little, bald seducer with a
nose like Punch, swept
along in his train a whole
procession of enamoured
women, both opulent and
tormented. D'Annunzio
had successfully revived the
Byronic legend: as he
passed by full-breasted
women, standing in his
way as Boldoni would
paint them, strings of
pearls anchoring them to
life—princesses and
actresses, great Russian
ladies and even middle-
class Bordeaux
housewives—they would
offer themselves up to him.
—PHILIPPE JULLIAN, PRINCE OF
AESTHETES: COUNT ROBERT
DE MONTESQUIEOU, TRANSLATED
BY JOHN HAYLOCK AND FRANCIS
KING
In short, nothing is so
sweet as to triumph over
the Resistance of a
beautiful Person; and in
that I have the Ambition
of Conquerors, who fly
perpetually from Victory to
Victory and can never
prevail with themselves to
put a bound to their
Wishes. Nothing can
restrain the Impetuosity of
my Desires; I have an
Heart for the whole Earth;
and like Alexander, I could
wish for New Worlds
wherein to extend my
Amorous Conquests.
—MOLIÈRE, DON JOHN OR
THE LIBERTINE, TRANSLATED BY
JOHN OZELL
