
Charisma and Seduction
Charisma is seduction on a mass level. Charismatics make crowds of
people fall in love with them, then lead them along. The process of
making them fall in love is simple and follows a path similar to that of a
one-on-one seduction. Charismatics have certain qualities that are power-
fully attractive and that make them stand out. This could be their self-
belief, their boldness, their serenity. They keep the source of these qualities
mysterious. They do not explain where their confidence or contentment
comes from, but it can be felt by everyone; it radiates outward, without the
appearance of conscious effort. The face of the Charismatic is usually ani-
mated, full of energy, desire, alertness—the look of a lover, one that is in-
stantly appealing, even vaguely sexual. We happily follow Charismatics
because we like to be led, particularly by people who promise adventure or
prosperity. We lose ourselves in their cause, become emotionally attached
to them, feel more alive by believing in them—we fall in love. Charisma
plays on repressed sexuality, creates an erotic charge. Yet the origins of the
word lie not in sexuality but in religion, and religion remains deeply em-
bedded in modern charisma.
Thousands of years ago, people believed in gods and spirits, but few
could ever say that they had witnessed a miracle, a physical demonstration
of divine power. A man, however, who seemed possessed by a divine
spirit—speaking in tongues, ecstatic raptures, the expression of intense
visions—would stand out as one whom the gods had singled out. And this
man, a priest or a prophet, gained great power over others. What made the
Hebrews believe in Moses, follow him out of Egypt, and remain loyal to
him despite their endless wandering in the desert? The look in his eye, his
inspired and inspiring words, the face that literally glowed when he came
down from Mount Sinai—all these things gave him the appearance of hav-
ing direct communication with God, and were the source of his authority.
And these were what was meant by "charisma," a Greek word referring to
prophets and to Christ himself. In early Christianity, charisma was a gift or
talent vouchsafed by God's grace and revealing His presence. Most of the
great religions were founded by a Charismatic, a person who physically dis-
played the signs of God's favor.
Over the years, the world became more rational. Eventually people
came to hold power not by divine right but because they won votes, or
proved their competence. The great early-twentieth-century German soci-"Charisma" shall be
understood to refer to an
extraordinary quality of a
person, regardless of
whether this quality is
actual, alleged or
presumed. "Charismatic
authority," hence, shall
refer to a rule over men,
whether predominately
ex tern al or p redominately
internal, to which the
governed submit because of
their belief in the
extraordinary quality of the
specific person.
—MAX WEBER, FROM MAX
WEBER: ESSAYS IN SOCIOLOGY,
EDITED BY HANS GERTH AND
C. WRIGHT MILLS
97
