358 • The Art of Seduction
Symbol: The Forest. The children are told not to go into the
forest that lies just beyond the safe confines of their home.
There is no law there, only wilderness, wild animals, and
criminals. But the chance to explore, the alluring dark-
ness, and the fact that it is prohibited are impossi-
ble to resist. And once inside, they want
to go farther and farther.
Reversal
The reversal of stirring up taboos would be to stay within the limits
of acceptable behavior. That would make for a very tepid seduc-
tion. Which is not to say that only evil or wild behavior is seductive; good-
ness, kindness, and an aura of spirituality can be tremendously attractive,
since they are rare qualities. But notice that the game is the same. A person
who is kind or good or spiritual within the limits that society prescribes has
a weak appeal. It is those who go to the extreme—the Gandhis, the Krish-
namurtis—who seduce us. They do not merely expound a spiritual life-
style, they do away with all personal material comfort to live out their
ascetic ideals. They too go beyond the limits, transgressing acceptable be-
havior, because societies would find it hard to function if everyone went
to such lengths. In seduction, there is absolutely no power in respecting
boundaries and limits.
Use Spiritual Lures
Every-
one has doubts and in-
securities—about their body,
their self-worth, their sexuality. If
your seduction appeals exclusively to the
physical, you will stir up these doubts and
make your targets self-conscious. Instead, lure
them out of their insecurities by making them fo-
cus on something sublime and spiritual: a religious
experience, a lofty work of art, the occult. Play up
your divine qualities; affect an air of discontent with
worldly things; speak of the stars, destiny, the hidden
threads that unite you and the object of the seduc-
tion. Lost in a spiritual mist, the target will feel
light and uninhibited. Deepen the effect of
your seduction by making its sexual cul-
mination seem like the spiritual
union of two souls.
