Fantasy in the Flesh
In 1964, a twenty-year-old Frenchman named Bernard Bouriscout ar-
rived in Beijing, China, to work as an accountant in the French embassy.
His first weeks there were not what he had expected. Bouriscout had
grown up in the French provinces, dreaming of travel and adventure.
When he had been assigned to come to China, images of the Forbidden
City, and of the gambling dens of Macao, had danced in his mind. But this
was Communist China, and contact between Westerners and Chinese was
almost impossible at the time. Bouriscout had to socialize with the other
Europeans stationed in the city, and what a boring and cliquish lot they
were. He grew lonely, regretted taking the assignment, and began making
plans to leave.
Then, at a Christmas party that year, Bouriscout's eyes were drawn to a
young Chinese man in a corner of the room. He had never seen anyone
Chinese at any of these affairs. The man was intriguing: he was slender and
short, a bit reserved, but he had an attractive presence. Bouriscout went up
and introduced himself. The man, Shi Pei Pu, proved to be a writer of
Chinese-opera librettos who also taught Chinese to members of the
French embassy. Aged twenty-six, he spoke perfect French. Everything
about him fascinated Bouriscout; his voice was like music, soft and whis-
pery, and he left you wanting to know more about him. Bouriscout, al-
though usually shy, insisted on exchanging telephone numbers. Perhaps Pei
Pu could be his Chinese tutor.
They met a few days later in a restaurant. Bouriscout was the only
Westerner there—at last a taste of something real and exotic. Pei Pu, it
turned out, had been a well-known actor in Chinese operas and came from
a family with connections to the former ruling dynasty. Now he wrote
operas about the workers, but he said this with a look of irony They began
to meet regularly, Pei Pu showing Bouriscout the sights of Beijing. Bouris-
cout loved his stories—Pei Pu talked slowly, and every historical detail
seemed to come alive as he spoke, his hands moving to embellish his words.
This, he might say, is where the last Ming emperor hung himself, pointing
to the spot and telling the story at the same time. Or, the cook in the
restaurant we just ate in once served in the palace of the last emperor, and
then another magnificent tale would follow. Pei Pu also talked of life in the
Beijing Opera, where men often played women's parts, and sometimes be-
came famous for it.Lovers and madmen have
such seething brains, \ Such
shaping fantasies, that
apprehend \ More than cool
reason ever comprehends.
—WILLIAM SHAKESPEARE,
A MIDSUMMER NIGHT'S
DREAM
He was not a sex person.
He was like . . . somebody
who had come down from
the clouds. He was not
human. You could not say
he was a man friend or a
woman friend; he was
somebody different
anyway. . . . You feel he
was only a friend who was
coming from another planet
and so nice also, so
overwhelming and
separated from the life of
the ground.
—BERNARD BOURISCOUT, IN
JOYCE WADLER, LIAISON
Romance had again come
her way personified by a
handsome young German
officer, Lieutenant Konrad
Friedrich, who called upon
her at Neuilly to ask her
help. He wanted Pauline
[Bonaparte] to use her
291
298 • The Art of Seduction
The two men became friends. Chinese contact with foreigners was re-
stricted, but they managed to find ways to meet. One evening Bouriscout
tagged along when Pei Pu visited the home of a French official to tutor the
children. He listened as Pei Pu told them "The Story of the Butterfly," a
tale from the Chinese opera: a young girl yearns to attend an imperial
school, but girls are not accepted there. She disguises herself as a boy, passes
the exams, and enters the school. A fellow student falls in love with her,
and she is attracted to him, so she tells him that she is actually a girl. Like
most of these tales, the story ends tragically. Pei Pu told it with unusual
emotion; in fact he had played the role of the girl in the opera.
A few nights later, as they were walking before the gates of the Forbid-
den City, Pei Pu returned to "The Story of the Butterfly" "Look at my
hands," he said, "Look at my face. That story of the butterfly, it is my story
too." In his slow, dramatic delivery he explained that his mother's first two
children had been girls. Sons were far more important in China; if the third
child was a girl, the father would have to take a second wife. The third child
came: another girl. But the mother was too frightened to reveal the truth,
and made an agreement with the midwife: they would say that the child
was a boy, and it would be raised as such. This third child was Pei Pu.
Over the years, Pei Pu had had to go to extreme lengths to disguise her
sex. She never used public bathrooms, plucked her hairline to look as if she
were balding, on and on. Bouriscout was enthralled by the story, and also
relieved, for like the boy in the butterfly tale, deep down he felt attracted to
Pei Pu. Now everything made sense—the small hands, the high-pitched
voice, the delicate neck. He had fallen in love with her, and, it seemed, the
feelings were reciprocated.
Pei Pu started visiting Bouriscout's apartment, and soon they were
sleeping together. She continued to dress as a man, even in his apartment,
but women in China wore men's clothes anyway, and Pei Pu acted more
like a woman than any of the Chinese women he had seen. In bed, she had
a shyness and a way of directing his hands that was both exciting and femi-
nine. She made everything romantic and heightened. When he was away
from her, her every word and gesture resonated in his mind. What made
the affair all the more exciting was the fact that they had to keep it secret.
In December of 1965, Bouriscout left Beijing and returned to Paris. He
traveled, had other affairs, but his thoughts kept returning to Pei Pu. The
Cultural Revolution broke out in China, and he lost contact with her. Be-
fore he had left, she had told him she was pregnant with their child. He had
no idea whether the baby had been born. His obsession with her grew too
strong, and in 1969 he finagled another government job in Beijing.
Contact with foreigners was now even more discouraged than on his
first visit, but he managed to track Pei Pu down. She told him she had
borne a son, in 1966, but he had looked like Bouriscout, and given the
growing hatred of foreigners in China, and the need to keep the secret of
her sex, she had him sent him away to an isolated region near Russia. It was
so cold there—perhaps he was dead. She showed Bouriscout photographsinfluence with Napoleon in
connection with providing
for the needs of the French
troops in the Papal States.
He made an instantaneous
impression on the princess,
who escorted him around
her garden until they
arrived at the rockery.
There she stopped and,
looking into the young
man's eyes mysteriously,
commanded him to return
to this same spot at the
same hour next day when
she might have some good
news for him. The young
officer bowed and took his
leave. . . . In his memoirs
he revealed in detail what
took place after the first
meeting with Pauline: •
"At the hour agreed on I
again proceeded to Neuilly,
made my way to the
appointed spot in the
garden and stood waiting
at the rockery. I had not
been there very long when
a lady made her
appearance, greeted me
pleasantly and led me
through a side door into the
interior of the rockery
where there were several
rooms and galleries and in
one splendid salon a
luxurious-looking bath.
The adventure was
beginning to strike me as
very romantic, almost like
a fairy tale, and just as I
was wondering what the
outcome might be a woman
in a robe of the sheerest
cambric entered by a side
door, came up to me, and
smilingly asked how I liked
being there. I at once
recognized Napoleon's
beautiful sister, whose
perfect figure was clearly
outlined by every
movement of her robe. She
held out her hand for me to
kiss and told me to sit
down on the couch beside
her. On this occasion I
certainly was not the
