56 • The Art of Seduction
adapt and build upon those childlike traits that they managed to preserve,
exactly as the child learns to play with its natural charm. This is the key. It
is within your power to do the same, since there is lurking within all of us a
devilish child straining to be let loose. To do this successfully, you have to
be able to let go to a degree, since there is nothing less natural than seeming
hesitant. Remember the spirit you once had; let it return, without self-
consciousness. People are much more forgiving of those who go all the
way, who seem uncontrollably foolish, than the halfhearted adult with a
childish streak. Remember who you were before you became so polite and
self-effacing. To assume the role of the Natural, mentally position yourself
in any relationship as the child, the younger one.
The following are the main types of the adult Natural. Keep in mind
that the greatest natural seducers are often a blend of more than one of
these qualities.
The innocent. The primary qualities of innocence are weakness and mis-
understanding of the world. Innocence is weak because it is doomed to
vanish in a harsh, cruel world; the child cannot protect or hold on to its in-
nocence. The misunderstandings come from the child's not knowing about
good and evil, and seeing everything through uncorrupted eyes. The weak-
ness of children elicits sympathy, their misunderstandings make us laugh,
and nothing is more seductive than a mixture of laughter and sympathy.
The adult Natural is not truly innocent—it is impossible to grow up in
this world and retain total innocence. Yet Naturals yearn so deeply to hold
on to their innocent outlook that they manage to preserve the illusion of
innocence. They exaggerate their weakness to elicit the proper sympathy.
They act like they still see the world through innocent eyes, which in an
adult proves doubly humorous. Much of this is conscious, but to be effec-
tive, adult Naturals must make it seem subtle and effortless—if they are
seen as trying to act innocent, it will come across as pathetic. It is better for
them to communicate weakness indirectly, through looks and glances, or
through the situations they get themselves into, rather than anything obvi-
ous. Since this type of innocence is mostly an act, it is easily adaptable for
your own purposes. Learn to play up any natural weaknesses or flaws.
The imp. Impish children have a fearlessness that we adults have lost. That
is because they do not see the possible consequences of their actions—how
some people might be offended, how they might physically hurt themselves
in the process. Imps are brazen, blissfully uncaring. They infect you with
their lighthearted spirit. Such children have not yet had their natural energy
and spirit scolded out of them by the need to be polite and civil. Secretly,
we envy them; we want to be naughty too.
Adult imps are seductive because of how different they are from the rest
of us. Breaths of fresh air in a cautious world, they go full throttle, as ifsteal them. But, fearing to
be betrayed by their tracks,
he quickly made a number
oj shoes from the bark of a
fallen oak and tied them
until plaited grass to the
feet of the cows, which he
then drove off by night
along the road. Apollo
discovered the loss, but
Hermes's trick deceived
him, and though he went
as far as Pylus in his
westward search, and to
Onchestus in his eastern,
he was forced, in the end,
to offer a reward for the
apprehension of the thief.
Silenus and his satyrs,
greedy of reward, spread
out in different directions to
track him down but, for a
long while, without success.
At last, as a party of them
passed through Arcadia,
they heard the muffled
sound of music such as
they had never heard
before, and the nymph
Cyllene, from the mouth of
a cave, told them that a
most gifted child had
recently been born there, to
whom she was acting as
nurse: he had constructed
an ingenious musical toy
from the shell of a tortoise
and some cow-gut, with
which he had lulled his
mother to sleep. • "And
from whom did he get the
cow-gut?" asked the alert
satyrs, noticing two hides
stretched outside the cave.
"Do you charge the poor
child with theft?" asked
Cyllene. Harsh words were
exchanged. • At that
moment Apollo came up,
having discovered the
thief's identity by observing
the suspicious behaviour of
a long-winged bird.
Entering the cave, he
awakened Maia and told
her severely that Hermes
must restore the stolen
cows. Maia pointed to the
child, still wrapped in his
The Natural • 57
their impishness were uncontrollable, and thus natural. If you play the part,
do not worry about offending people now and then—you are too lovable
and inevitably they will forgive you. Just don't apologize or look contrite,
for that would break the spell. Whatever you say or do, keep a glint in your
eye to show that you do not take anything seriously.
The wonder. A wonder child has a special, inexplicable talent: a gift for
music, for mathematics, for chess, for sport. At work in the field in which
they have such prodigal skill, these children seem possessed, and their ac-
tions effortless. If they are artists or musicians, Mozart types, their work
seems to spring from some inborn impulse, requiring remarkably little
thought. If it is a physical talent that they have, they are blessed with un-
usual energy, dexterity, and spontaneity. In both cases they seem talented
beyond their years. This fascinates us.
Adult wonders are often former wonder children who have managed,
remarkably, to retain their youthful impulsiveness and improvisational skills.
True spontaneity is a delightful rarity, for everything in life conspires to rob
us of it—we have to learn to act carefully and deliberately, to think about
how we look in other people's eyes. To play the wonder you need some
skill that seems easy and natural, along with the ability to improvise. If in
fact your skill takes practice, you must hide this and learn to make your
work appear effortless. The more you hide the sweat behind what you do,
the more natural and seductive it will appear.
The undefensive lover. As people get older, they protect themselves against
painful experiences by closing themselves off. The price for this is that they
grow rigid, physically and mentally. But children are by nature unprotected
and open to experience, and this receptiveness is extremely attractive. In
the presence of children we become less rigid, infected with their open-
ness. That is why we want to be around them.
Undefensive lovers have somehow circumvented the self-protective
process, retaining the playful, receptive spirit of the child. They often
manifest this spirit physically: they are graceful, and seem to age less rapidly
than other people. Of all the Natural's character qualities, this one is the
most useful. Defensiveness is deadly in seduction; act defensive and you'll
bring out defensiveness in other people. The undefensive lover, on the
other hand, lowers the inhibitions of his or her target, a critical part of se-
duction. It is important to learn to not react defensively: bend instead of
resist, be open to influence from others, and they will more easily fall under
your spell.swaddling bands and
feigning sleep. "What an
absurd charge!" she cried.
But Apollo had already
recognized the hides. He
picked up Hermes, carried
him to Olympus, and there
formally accused him of
theft, offering the hides as
evidence. Zeus, loth to
believe that his own new-
born son was a thief
encouraged him to plead
not guilty, but Apollo
would not be put off and
Hermes, at last, weakened
and confessed. • "Very
well, come with me," he
said, "and you may have
your herd. I slaughtered
only two, and those I cut
up into twelve equal
portions as a sacrifice to the
twelve gods" • "Twelve
gods?" asked Apollo.
"Who is the twelfth?" •
"Your servant, sir" replied
Hermes modestly. "I ate
no more than my share,
though I was very hungry,
and duly burned the rest. "
• The two gods [ Hermes
and Apollo] returned to
Mount Cyllene, where
Hermes greeted his mother
and retrieved something
that he had hidden
underneath a sheepskin. •
"What have you there?"
asked Apollo. • In answer,
Hermes showed his newly-
invented tortoise-shell lyre,
and played such a
ravishing tune on it with
the plectrum he had also
invented, at the same time
singing in praise of
Apollo's nobility,
intelligence, and generosity,
that he was forgiven at
once. He led the surprised
and delighted Apollo to
Pylus, playing all the way,
and there gave him the
remainder of the cattle,
which he had hidden in a
cave. • "A bargain!" cried
Apollo. "You keep the
cows, and I take the lyre. "
