208 • The Art of Seduction
which they glimpse that inner emptiness. Made aware of a lack, they now
can focus on you as the person who can fill that empty space. Remember:
most of us are lazy. To relieve our feelings of boredom or inadequacy on
our own takes too much effort; letting someone else do the job is both
easier and more exciting. The desire to have someone fill up our emptiness
is the weakness on which all seducers prey. Make people anxious about the
future, make them depressed, make them question their identity, make
them sense the boredom that gnaws at their life. The ground is prepared.
The seeds of seduction can be sown.
In Plato's dialogue Symposium—the West's oldest treatise on love, and a
text that has had a determining influence on our ideas of desire—the cour-
tesan Diotima explains to Socrates the parentage of Eros, the god of love.
Eros's father was Contrivance, or Cunning, and his mother was Poverty, or
Need. Eros takes after his parents: he is constantly in need, which he is con-
stantly contriving to fill. As the god of love, he knows that love cannot be
induced in another person unless they too feel need. And that is what his
arrows do: piercing people's flesh, they make them feel a lack, an ache, a
hunger. This is the essence of your task as a seducer. Like Eros, you must
create a wound in your victim, aiming at their soft spot, the chink in their
self-esteem. If they are stuck in a rut, make them feel it more deeply, "in-
nocently" bringing it up and talking about it. What you want is a wound,
an insecurity you can expand a little, an anxiety that can best be relieved by
involvement with another person, namely you. They must feel the wound
before they fall in love. Notice how Lawrence stirred anxiety, always hitting
at his victims' weak spot: for Jessie Chambers, her physical coldness; for Ivy
Low, her lack of spontaneity; for Middleton-Murry, his lack of gallantry.
Cleopatra got Julius Caesar to sleep with her the first night he met her,
but the real seduction, the one that made him her slave, began later. In their
ensuing conversations she talked repeatedly of Alexander the Great, the
hero from whom she was supposedly descended. No one could compare to
him. By implication, Caesar was made to feel inferior. Understanding that
beneath his bravado Caesar was insecure, Cleopatra awakened in him an
anxiety, a hunger to prove his greatness. Once he felt this way he was easily
further seduced. Doubts about his masculinity was his tender spot.
When Caesar was assassinated, Cleopatra turned her sights on Mark
Antony, one of Caesar's successors in the leadership of Rome. Antony
loved pleasure and spectacle, and his tastes were crude. She appeared to him
first on her royal barge, then wined and dined and banqueted him. Every-
thing was geared to suggest to him the superiority of the Egyptian way of
life over the Roman, at least when it came to pleasure. The Romans were
boring and unsophisticated by comparison. And once Antony was made to
feel how much he was missing in spending his time with his dull soldiers
and his matronly Roman wife, he could be made to see Cleopatra as the in-
carnation of all that was exciting. He became her slave.
This is the lure of the exotic. In your role of seducer, try to position
yourself as coming from outside, as a stranger of sorts. You representPeasant! No, no; that's a
profanation of so much
Beauty. You was not born
to live in a Village. You
certainly deserve a better
Fortune, and Heaven,
which knows it well,
brought me hither on
purpose to hinder this
Marriage and do justice to
your Charms; for in short,
fair Charlotta, I love you
with all my Heart, and if
you'll consent I'll deliver
you from this miserable
Place, and put you in the
Condition you deserve.
This Love is doubtless
sudden, but 'tis an Effect of
your great Beauty. I love
you as much in a quarter of
an Hour as I shou'd
another in six Months.
—MOLIÈRE, DON JOHN; OR,
THE LIBERTINE, TRANSLATED BY
JOHN OZELL, IN OSCAR
MANDEL, ED., THE THEATRE OF
DON JUAN
For I stand tonight facing
west on what was once the
last frontier. From the
lands that stretch three
thousand miles behind me,
the pioneers of old gave up
their safety, their comfort,
and sometimes their lives to
build a new world here in
the West. They were not
the captives of their own
doubts, the prisoners of
their own price tags. Their
motto was not "every man
for himself—but "all for
the common cause." They
were determined to make
that new world strong and
free, to overcome its
hazards and its hardships,
to conquer the enemies that
threatened from without
and within. . . . • Today
some would say that those
struggles are all over—that
all the horizons have been
explored, that all the
battles have been won, that
there is no longer an
Create a Need—Stir Anxiety and Discontent • 209
change, difference, a breakup of routines. Make your victims feel that by
comparison their lives are boring and their friends less interesting than they
had thought. Lawrence made his targets feel personally inadequate; if you
find it hard to be so brutal, concentrate on their friends, their circum-
stances, the externals of their lives. There are many legends of Don Juan,
but they often describe him seducing a village girl by making her feel that
her life is horribly provincial. He, meanwhile, wears glittering clothes and
has a noble bearing. Strange and exotic, he is always from somewhere else.
First she feels the boredom of her life, then she sees him as her salvation.
Remember: people prefer to feel that if their life is uninteresting, it not be-
cause of themselves but because of their circumstances, the dull people
they know, the town into which they were born. Once you make them feel
the lure of the exotic, seduction is easy.
Another devilishly seductive area to aim at is the victim's past. To grow
old is to renounce or compromise youthful ideals, to become less sponta-
neous, less alive in a way. This knowledge lies dormant in all of us. As a se-
ducer you must bring it to the surface, make it clear how far people have
strayed from their past goals and ideals. You, in turn, present yourself as
representing that ideal, as offering a chance to recapture lost youth through
adventure—through seduction. In her later years, Queen Elizabeth I of En-
gland was known as a rather stern and demanding ruler. She made it a point
not to let her courtiers see anything soft or weak in her. But then Robert
Devereux, the second Earl of Essex, came to court. Much younger than
the queen, the dashing Essex would often chastize her for her sourness.
The queen would forgive him—he was so exuberant and spontaneous, he
could not control himself. But his comments got under her skin; in the pres-
ence of Essex she came to remember all the youthful ideals—spiritedness,
feminine charm—that had since vanished from her life. She also felt a little
of that girlish spirit return when she was around him. He quickly became
her favorite, and soon she was in love with him. Old age is constantly se-
duced by youth, but first the young people must make it clear what the
older ones are missing, how they have lost their ideals. Only then will they
feel that the presence of the young will let them recapture that spark, the
rebellious spirit that age and society have conspired to repress.
This concept has infinite applications. Corporations and politicians
know that they cannot seduce their public into buying what they want
them to buy, or doing what they want them to do, unless they first awaken
a sense of need and discontent. Make the masses uncertain about their
identity and you can help define it for them. It is as true of groups or na-
tions as it is of individuals: they cannot be seduced without being made to
feel some lack. Part of John F. Kennedy's election strategy in 1960 was to
make Americans unhappy about the 1950s, and how far the country had
strayed from its ideals. In talking about the 1950s, he did not mention the
nation's economic stability or its emergence as a superpower. Instead, he
implied that the period was marked by conformity, a lack of risk and ad-
venture, a loss of our frontier values. To vote for Kennedy was to embarkAmerican frontier. • But I
trust that no one in this
vast assemblage will agree
with those sentiments. . . .
• . . . I tell you the New
Frontier is here, whether
we seek it or not. . . . It
would be easier to shrink
back from that frontier, to
look to the safe mediocrity
of the past, to be lulled by
good intentions and high
rhetoric—and those who
prefer that course should
not cast their votes for me,
regardless of party. • But I
believe that the times
demand invention,
innovation, imagination,
decision. I am asking each
of you to be new pioneers
on that New Frontier. My
call is to the young in
heart, regardless of age.
—JOHN F. KENNEDY,
ACCEPTANCE SPEECH AS THE
PRESIDENTIAL NOMINEE OF THE
DEMOCRATIC PARTY, QUOTED IN
JOHN HELLMANN, THE
KENNEDY OBSESSION: THE
AMERICAN MYTH OF JFK
The normal rhythm of life
oscillates in general between
a mild satisfaction with
oneself and a slight
discomfort, originating in
the knowledge of one's
personal shortcomings. We
should like to be as
handsome, young, strong or
clever as other people of our
acquaintance. We wish we
could achieve as much as
they do, long for similar
advantages, positions, the
same or greater success. To
be delighted with oneself is
the exception and, often
enough, a smoke screen
which we produce for
ourselves and of course for
others. Somewhere in it is
a lingering feeling of
discomfort with ourselves
and a slight self-dislike. I
assert that an increase of
