The Soft Sell
Seduction is the ultimate form of power. Those who give in to it do so
willingly and happily. There is rarely any resentment on their part; they
forgive you any kind of manipulation because you have brought them plea-
sure, a rare commodity in the world. With such power at your fingertips,
though, why stop at the conquest of a man or woman? A crowd, an elec-
torate, a nation can be brought under your sway simply by applying on a
mass level the tactics that work so well on an individual. The only differ-
ence is the goal—not sex but influence, a vote, people's attention—and the
degree of tension. When you are after sex, you deliberately create anxiety, a
touch of pain, twists, and turns. Seduction on the mass level is more diffuse
and soft. Creating a constant titillation, you fascinate the masses with what
you are offering. They pay attention to you because it is pleasant to do so.
Let us say your goal is to sell yourself—as a personality, a trendsetter, a
candidate for office. There are two ways to go: the hard sell (the direct ap-
proach) and the soft sell (the indirect approach). In the hard sell you state
your case strongly and directly, explaining why your talents, your ideas,
your political message are superior to anyone else's. You tout your achieve-
ments, quote statistics, bring in expert opinions, even go so far as to induce
a bit of fear if the audience ignores your message. The approach is a tad ag-
gressive and might have unwanted consequences: some people will be of-
fended, resisting your message, even if what you say is true. Others will feel
you are manipulating them—who can trust experts and statistics, and why
are you trying so hard? You will also grate on people's nerves, becoming
unpleasant to listen to. In a world in which you cannot succeed without
selling to large numbers, the direct approach won't take you far.
The soft sell, on the other hand, has the potential to draw in millions
because it is entertaining, gentle on the ears, and can be repeated with-
out irritating people. The technique was invented by the great charlatans
of seventeenth-century Europe. To peddle their elixirs and alchemic
concoctions, they would first put on a show—clowns, music, vaudeville-
type routines—that had nothing to do with what they were selling. A
crowd would form, and as the audience laughed and relaxed, the charlatan
would come onstage and briefly and dramatically discuss the miraculous ef-
fects of the elixir. By honing this technique, the charlatans discovered that
instead of selling a few dozen bottles of the dubious medicine, they were
suddenly selling scores or even hundreds.
443
444 • Appendix B: Soft Seduction: How to Sell Anything to the Masses
In the centuries since, publicists, advertisers, political strategists, and
others have taken this method to new heights, but the rudiments of the soft
sell remain the same. First bring pleasure by creating a positive atmosphere
around your name or message. Induce a warm, relaxed feeling. Never seem
to be selling something—that will look manipulative and suspicious. In-
stead, let entertainment value and good feelings take center stage, sneaking
the sale through the side door. And in that sale, you do not seem to be sell-
ing yourself or a particular idea or candidate; you are selling a life-style, a
good mood, a sense of adventure, a feeling of hipness, or a neatly packaged
rebellion.
Here are some of the key components of the soft sell.
Appear as news, never as publicity. First impressions are critical. If
your audience first sees you in the context of an advertisement or publicity
item, you instantly join the mass of other advertisements screaming for
attention—and everyone knows that advertisements are artful manipula-
tions, a kind of deception. So, for your first appearance in the public eye,
manufacture an event, some kind of attention-getting situation that the
media will "inadvertently" pick up as if it were news. People pay more at-
tention to what is broadcast as news—it seems more real. You suddenly
stand out from everything else, if only for a moment—but that moment
has more credibility than hours of advertising time. The key is to orches-
trate the details thoroughly, creating a story with dramatic impact and
movement, tension and resolution. The media will cover it for days. Con-
ceal your real purpose—to sell yourself—at any cost.
Stir basic emotions. Never promote your message through a rational, di-
rect argument. That will take effort on your audience's part and will not
gain its attention. Aim for the heart, not the head. Design your words and
images to stir basic emotions—lust, patriotism, family values. It is easier to
gain and hold people's attention once you have made them think of their
family, their children, their future. They feel stirred, uplifted. Now you
have their attention and the space to insinuate your true message. Days later
the audience will remember your name, and remembering your name is
half the game. Similarly, find ways to surround yourself with emotional
magnets—war heroes, children, saints, small animals, whatever it takes.
Make your appearance bring these emotionally positive associations to
mind, giving you extra presence. Never let these associations be defined or
created for you, and never leave them to chance.
Make the medium the message. Pay more attention to the form of your
message than to the content. Images are more seductive than words, and vi-
suals—soothing colors, appropriate backdrop, the suggestion of speed
