312 • The Art of Seduction
Shih comb her hair, using the pool as a mirror. He would watch her play-
ing with her birds, in their jeweled cages, or simply walking through the
palace, for she moved like a willow in the breeze. The months went by; he
stayed in the palace. He missed councils, ignored his family and friends, ne-
glected his public functions. He lost track of time. When a delegation came
to talk to him of urgent matters, he was too distracted to listen. If anything
but Hsi Shih took up his time, he worried unbearably that she would be
angry.
Finally word reached him of a growing crisis: the fortune he had spent
on the palace had bankrupted the treasury, and the people were discon-
tented. He returned to the capital, but it was too late: an army from the
kingdom of Yueh had invaded Wu, and had reached the capital. All was
lost. Fu Chai had no time to rejoin his beloved Hsi Shih. Instead of letting
himself be captured by the king of Yueh, the man who had once served in
his stables, he committed suicide.
Little did he know that Kou Chien had plotted this invasion for years,
and that Hsi Shih's elaborate seduction was the main part of his plan.
Interpretation. Kou Chien wanted to make sure that his invasion of Wu
would not fail. His enemy was not Fu Chai's armies, or his wealth and his
resources, but his mind. If he could be deeply distracted, his mind filled
with something other than affairs of state, he would fall like ripe fruit.
Kou Chien found the most beautiful maiden in his realm. For three
years he had her trained in all of the arts—not just singing, dancing, and
calligraphy, but how to dress, how to talk, how to play the coquette. And it
worked: Hsi Shih did not allow Fu Chai a moment's rest. Everything about
her was exotic and unfamiliar. The more attention he paid to her hair, her
moods, her glances, the way she moved, the less he thought about diplo-
macy and war. He was driven to distraction.
All of us today are kings protecting the tiny realm of our own lives,
weighed down by all kinds of responsibilities, surrounded by ministers and
advisers. A wall forms around us—we are immune to the influence of other
people, because we are so preoccupied. Like Hsi Shih, then, you must lure
your targets away, gently, slowly, from the affairs that fill their mind. And
what will best lure them from their castles is the whiff of the exotic. Offer
something unfamiliar that will fascinate them and hold their attention. Be
different in your manners and appearance, and slowly envelop them in this
different world of yours. Keep your targets off balance with coquettish
changes of mood. Do not worry that the disruption you represent is mak-
ing them emotional—that is a sign of their growing weakness. Most people
are ambivalent: on the one hand they feel comforted by their habits and
duties, on the other they are bored, and ripe for anything that seems exotic,
that seems to come from somewhere else. They may struggle or have
doubts, but exotic pleasures are irresistible. The more you can get themthe king either for good
or ill. ...• Amidst the
revelers in the halls of Wu,
Hsi Shih wove her net
of fascination about the
heart of the susceptible
monarch. . . . "Inflamed
by wine, she now begins to
sing / The songs of Wu to
please the fatuous king; /
And in the dance of Tsu
she subtly blends /All
rhythmic movements to her
sensuous ends." . . . But
she could do more than
sing and dance to amuse
the king. She had wit, and
her grasp of politics
astonished him. When
there was anything she
wanted she could shed tears
which so moved her lover's
heart that he could refuse
her nothing. For she was,
as Fan Li had said, the
one and only, the
incomparable Hsi Shih,
whose magnetic personality
attracted everyone, many
even against their own
will. . . . • Embroidered
silk curtains encrusted with
coral and gems, scented
furniture and screens inlaid
with jade and mother-of-
pearl were among the
luxuries which surrounded
the favorite. . . . On one
of the hills near the palace
there was a celebrated pool
of clear water which has
been known ever since as
the pool of the king of
Wu. Here, to amuse her
lover, Hsi Shih would
make her toilet, using the
pool as a mirror while
the infatuated king combed
her hair. . . .
—ELOISE TALCOTT HIBBERT,
EMBROIDERED GAUZE:
PORTRAITS OR FAMOUS
CHINESE LADIES
Isolate the Victim • 313
into your world, the weaker they become. As with the king of Wu, by the
time they realize what has happened, it is too late.
Isolation—The "Only You" Effect
In 1948, the twenty-nine-year-old actress Rita Hayworth, known as
Hollywood's Love Goddess, was at a low point in her life. Her marriage
to Orson Welles was breaking up, her mother had died, and her career
seemed stalled. That summer she headed for Europe. Welles was in Italy at
the time, and in the back of her mind she was dreaming of a reconciliation.
Rita stopped first at the French Riviera. Invitations poured in, particu-
larly from wealthy men, for at the time she was considered the most beauti-
ful woman in the world. Aristotle Onassis and the Shah of Iran telephoned
her almost daily, begging for a date. She turned them all down. A few days
after her arrival, though, she received an invitation from Elsa Maxwell, the
society hostess, who was giving a little party in Cannes. Rita balked but
Maxwell insisted, telling her to buy a new dress, show up a little late, and
make a grand entrance.
Rita played along, and arrived at the party wearing a white Grecian
gown, her red hair falling over her bare shoulders. She was greeted by a re-
action she had grown used to: all conversation stopped as both men and
women turned in their chairs, the men gazing in amazement, the women
jealous. A man hurried to her side and escorted her to her table. It was
thirty-seven-year-old Prince Aly Khan, the son of the Aga Khan III, who
was the worldwide leader of the Islamic Ismaili sect and one of the richest
men in the world. Rita had been warned about Aly Khan, a notorious rake.
To her dismay, they were seated next to each other, and he never left her
side. He asked her a million questions—about Hollywood, her interests, on
and on. She began to relax a little and open up. There were other beautiful
women there, princesses, actresses, but Aly Khan ignored them all, acting as
if Rita were the only woman there. He led her onto the dance floor, and
though he was an expert dancer, she felt uncomfortable—he held her a lit-
tle too close. Still, when he offered to drive her back to her hotel, she
agreed. They sped along the Grande Corniche; it was a beautiful night. For
one evening she had managed to forget her many problems, and she was
grateful, but she was still in love with Welles, and an affair with a rake like
Aly Khan was not what she needed.
Aly Khan had to fly off on business for a few days; he begged her to
stay at the Riviera until he got back. While he was away, he telephoned
constantly. Every morning a giant bouquet of flowers arrived. On the tele-
phone he seemed particularly annoyed that the Shah of Iran was trying
hard to see her, and he made her promise to break the date to which she
had finally agreed. During this time, a gypsy fortune-teller visited the hotel,
and Rita agreed to have her fortune read. "You are about to embark on theIn Cairo Aly bumped into
[the singer] Juliette Greco
again. He asked her to
dance. • "You have too bad
a reputation," she replied.
"We're going to sit very
much apart. " • "What are
you doing tomorrow?" he
insisted. • "Tomorrow I
take a plane to Beirut." •
When she boarded the
plane, Aly was already
on it, grinning at her
surprise. ...• Dressed in
tight black leather slacks
and a black sweater
[Greco] stretched
languorously in an
armchair of her Paris house
and observed: • "They say
I am a dangerous woman.
Well, Aly was a dangerous
man. He was charming in
a very special way. There is
a kind of man who is very
clever with women. He
takes you out to a
restaurant and if the most
beautiful woman comes in,
he doesn't look at her. He
makes you feel you are a
queen. Of course, I
understood it. I didn 't
believe it. I would laugh
and point out the
beautiful woman. But that
is me. . . . Most women
are made very happy by
that kind of attention. It's
pure vanity. She thinks,
'I'll be the one and the
others will leave.'
• "... With Aly, how
the woman felt was most
important. . . . He was a
great charmer, a great
seducer. He made you feel
fine and that everything
was easy. No problems.
Nothing to worry about.
Or regret. It was always,
'What can I do for you?
What do you need?'
Airplane tickets, cars,
boats; you felt you were on
a pink cloud."
—LEONARD SLATER,
ALY: A BIOGRAPHY
