122 • The Art of Seduction
The Blue Angel was a huge success in Germany. Audiences were fasci-
nated with Dietrich: that cold, brutal stare as she spread her legs over a
stool, baring her underwear; her effortless way of commanding attention
on screen. Others besides von Sternberg became obsessed with her. A man
dying of cancer, Count Sascha Kolowrat, had one last wish: to see Mar-
lene's legs in person. Dietrich obliged, visiting him in the hospital and lift-
ing up her skirt; he sighed and said "Thank you. Now I can die happy."
Soon Paramount Studios brought Dietrich to Hollywood, where everyone
was quickly talking about her. At a party, all eyes would turn toward her
when she came into the room. She would be escorted by the most hand-
some men in Hollywood, and would be wearing an outfit both beautiful
and unusual—gold-lame pajamas, a sailor suit with a yachting cap. The
next day the look would be copied by women all over town; next it would
spread to magazines, and a whole new trend would start.
The real object of fascination, however, was unquestionably Dietrich's
face. What had enthralled von Sternberg was her blankness—with a simple
lighting trick he could make that face do whatever he wanted. Dietrich
eventually stopped working with von Sternberg, but never forgot what he
had taught her. One night in 1951, the director Fritz Lang, who was about
to direct her in the film Rancho Notorious, was driving past his office when
he saw a light flash in the window. Fearing a burglary, he got out of his car,
crept up the stairs, and peeked through the crack in the door: it was Diet-
rich taking pictures of herself in the mirror, studying her face from every
angle.
Marlene Dietrich had a distance from her own self: she could study her
face, her legs, her body, as if she were someone else. This gave her the
ability to mold her look, transforming her appearance for effect. She could
pose in just the way that would most excite a man, her blankness letting
him see her according to his fantasy, whether of sadism, voluptuousness, or
danger. And every man who met her, or who watched her on screen, fan-
tasized endlessly about her. The effect worked on women as well; in the
words of one writer, she projected "sex without gender." But this self-
distance gave her a certain coldness, whether on film or in person. She was
like a beautiful object, something to fetishize and admire the way we ad-
mire a work of art.
The fetish is an object that commands an emotional response and that
makes us breathe life into it. Because it is an object we can imagine what-
ever we want to about it. Most people are too moody, complex, and reac-
tive to let us see them as objects that we can fetishize. The power of the
Fetishistic Star comes from an ability to become an object, and not just any
object but an object we fetishize, one that stimulates a variety of fantasies.
Fetishistic Stars are perfect, like the statue of a Greek god or goddess. The
effect is startling, and seductive. Its principal requirement is self-distance. If
you see yourself as an object, then others will too. An ethereal, dreamlike
air will heighten the effect.revolted by the many faults
which nature has
implanted in the female
sex, and long lived a
bachelor existence, without
any wife to share his home.
But meanwhile, with
marvelous artistry, he
skillfully carved a snowy
ivory statue. He made it
lovelier than any woman
born, and fell in love with
his own creation. The
statue had all the
appearance of a real girl, so
that it seemed to be alive,
to want to move, did not
modesty forbid. So cleverly
did his art conceal its art.
Pygmalion gazed in
wonder, and in his heart
there rose a passionate love
for this image of a human
form. Often he ran his
hands over the work,
feeling it to see whether it
was flesh or ivory, and
would not yet admit that
ivory was all it was. He
kissed the statue, and
imagined that it kissed him
back, spoke to it and
embraced it, and thought
he felt his fingers sink into
the limbs he touched, so
that he was afraid lest a
bruise appear where he had
pressed the flesh.
Sometimes he addressed it
in flattering speeches,
sometimes brought the kind
of presents that girls
enjoy. . . . He dressed the
limbs of his statue in
woman's robes, and put
rings on its fingers, long
necklaces round its
neck. . . . All this finery
became the image well, but
it was no less lovely
unadorned. Pygmalion
then placed the statue on a
couch that was covered with
cloths of Tynan purple,
laid its head to rest on soft
down pillows, as if it could
appreciate them, and called
it his bedfellow. • The
festival of Venus, which is
celebrated with the greatest
The Star • 123
You are a blank screen. Float through life noncommittally and people
will want to seize you and consume you. Of all the parts of your body that
draw this fetishistic attention, the strongest is the face; so learn to tune your
face like an instrument, making it radiate a fascinating vagueness for effect.
And since you will have to stand out from other Stars in the sky, you will
need to develop an attention-getting style. Dietrich was the great practi-
tioner of this art; her style was chic enough to dazzle, weird enough to en-
thrall. Remember, your own image and presence are materials you can
control. The sense that you are engaged in this kind of play will make peo-
ple see you as superior and worthy of imitation.
She had such natural poise . . . such an economy of ges-
ture, that she became as absorbing as a Modigliani. . . .
She had the one essential star quality: she could be mag-
nificent doing nothing.
—BERLIN ACTRESS LILI DARVAS ON MARLENE DIETRICH
The Mythic Star
On July 2, 1960, a few weeks before that year's Democratic National
Convention, former President Harry Truman publicly stated that
John F. Kennedy—who had won enough delegates to be chosen his party's
candidate for the presidency—was too young and inexperienced for the
job. Kennedy's response was startling: he called a press conference, to be
televised live, and nationwide, on July 4. The conference's drama was
heightened by the fact that he was away on vacation, so that no one saw or
heard from him until the event itself. Then, at the appointed hour,
Kennedy strode into the conference room like a sheriff entering Dodge
City. He began by stating that he had run in all of the state primaries, at
considerable expense of money and effort, and had beaten his opponents
fairly and squarely. Who was Truman to circumvent the democratic
process? "This is a young country," Kennedy went on, his voice getting
louder, "founded by young men . . . and still young in heart. . . . The
world is changing, the old ways will not do, . . . It is time for a new genera-
tion of leadership to cope with new problems and new opportunities."
Even Kennedy's enemies agreed that his speech that day was stirring. He
turned Truman's challenge around: the issue was not his inexperience but
the older generation's monopoly on power. His style was as eloquent as
his words, for his performance evoked films of the time—Alan Ladd in
Shane confronting the corrupt older ranchers, or James Dean in Rebel With-
out a Cause. Kennedy even resembled Dean, particularly in his air of cool
detachment.
A few months later, now approved as the Democrats' presidential can-
didate, Kennedy squared off against his Republican opponent, Richard
Nixon, in their first nationally televised debate. Nixon was sharp; he knewpomp all through Cyprus,
was now in progress, and
heifers, their crooked horns
gilded for the occasion, had
fallen at the altar as the
axe struck their snowy
necks. Smoke was rising
from the incense, when
Pygmalion, having made
his offering, stood by the
altar and timidly prayed,
saying: "If you gods can
give all things, may I have
as my wife, I pray—"he
did not dare to say: "the
ivory maiden," but
finished: "one like the
ivory maid." However,
golden Venus, present at
her festival in person,
understood what his
prayers meant, and as a
sign that the gods were
kindly disposed, the flames
burned up three times,
shooting a tongue of fire
into the air. When
Pygmalion returned home,
he made straight for the
statue of the girl he loved,
leaned over the couch, and
kissed her. She seemed
warm: he laid his lips on
hers again, and touched her
breast with his hands—at
his touch the ivory lost its
hardness, and grew soft.
—OVID, METAMORPHOSES,
TRANSLATED BY MARY M. INNES
[John F.] Kennedy
brought to television news
and photojournalism the
components most prevalent
in the world of film: star
quality and mythic story.
With his telegenic looks,
skills at self presentation,
heroic fantasies, and
creative intelligence,
Kennedy was brilliantly
prepared to project a major
screen persona. He
appropriated the discourses
of mass culture, especially
of Hollywood, and
transferred them to the
