Isolate the Victim • 317
trast how much better the present is. The more you can isolate them from
their past, the deeper they will sink with you into the present.
The principle of isolation can be taken literally by whisking the target
off to an exotic locale. This was Aly Khan's method; a secluded island
worked best, and indeed islands, cut off from the rest of the world, have al-
ways been associated with the pursuit of sensual pleasures. The Roman
Emperor Tiberius descended into debauchery once he made his home on
the island of Capri. The danger of travel is that your targets are intimately
exposed to you—it is hard to maintain an air of mystery. But if you take
them to a place alluring enough to distract them, you will prevent them
from focusing on anything banal in your character. Cleopatra lured Julius
Caesar into taking a voyage down the Nile. Moving deeper into Egypt, he
was further isolated from Rome, and Cleopatra was all the more seductive.
The early-twentieth-century lesbian seductress Natalie Barney had an on-
again-off-again affair with the poet Renée Vivien; to regain her affections,
she took Renée on a trip to the island of Lesbos, a place Natalie had visited
many times. In doing so she not only isolated Renée but disarmed and dis-
tracted her with the associations of the place, the home of the legendary
lesbian poet Sappho. Vivien even began to imagine that Natalie was Sap-
pho herself. Do not take the target just anywhere; pick the place that will
have the most effective associations.
The seductive power of isolation goes beyond the sexual realm. When
new adherents joined Mahatma Gandhi's circle of devoted followers, they
were encouraged to cut off their ties with the past—with their family and
friends. This kind of renunciation has been a requirement of many reli-
gious sects over the centuries. People who isolate themselves in this way are
much more vulnerable to influence and persuasion. A charismatic politi-
cian feeds off and even encourages people's feelings of alienation. John F.
Kennedy did this to great effect when he subtly disparaged the Eisenhower
years; the comfort of the 1950s, he implied, compromised American ideals.
He invited Americans to join him in a new life, on a "New Frontier," full
of danger and excitement. It was an extremely seductive lure, particularly
for the young, who were Kennedy's most enthusiastic supporters.
Finally, at some point in the seduction there must be a hint of danger in
the mix. Your targets should feel that they are gaining a great adventure in
following you, but are also losing something—a part of their past, their
cherished comfort. Actively encourage these ambivalent feelings. An ele-
ment of fear is the proper spice; although too much fear is debilitating, in
small doses it makes us feel alive. Like diving out of an airplane, it is excit-
ing, a thrill, at the same time that it is a little frightening. And the only per-
son there to break the fall, or catch them, is you.
318 • The Art of Seduction
Symbol: The Pied Piper. A jolly fellow in his red and yellow cloak,
he lures the children from their homes with the delightful sounds of his
flute. Enchanted, they do not notice how far they are walking, how
they are leaving their families behind. They do not even notice the cave
he eventually leads them into, and which closes upon them forever.
Reversal
The risks of this strategy are simple: isolate someone too quickly and
you will induce a sense of panic that may end up in the target's taking
flight. The isolation you bring must be gradual, and disguised as pleasure—
the pleasure of knowing you, leaving the world behind. In any case, some
people are too fragile to be cut off from their base of support. The great
modern courtesan Pamela Harriman had a solution to this problem: she
isolated her victims from their families, their former or present wives, and
in place of those old connections she quickly set up new comforts for her
lovers. She overwhelmed them with attention, attending to their every
need. In the case of Averill Harriman, the billionaire who eventually mar-
ried her, she literally established a new home for him, one that had no asso-
ciations with the past and was full of the pleasures of the present. It is
unwise to keep the seduced dangling in midair for too long, with nothing
familiar or comforting in sight. Instead, replace the familiar things you have
cut them off from with a new home, a new series of comforts.
