164 • The Art of Seduction
four phases, each phase with a particular goal to aim for: getting the victim
to think of you; gaining access to their emotions by creating moments of
pleasure and confusion; going deeper by working on their unconscious,
stirring up repressed desires; and finally, inducing physical surrender. (The
phases are clearly marked and explained with a short introduction.) By fol-
lowing these phases you will work more effectively on your victim's mind
and create the slow and hypnotic pace of a ritual. In fact, the seductive
process may be thought of as a kind of initiation ritual, in which you are
uprooting people from their habits, giving them novel experiences, putting
them through tests, before initiating them into a new life.
It is best to read all of the chapters and gain as much knowledge as pos-
sible. When it comes time to apply these tactics, you will want to pick and
choose which ones are appropriate for your particular victim; sometimes
only a few are sufficient, depending on the level of resistance you meet and
the complexity of your victim's problems. These tactics are equally applica-
ble to social and political seductions, minus the sexual component in Phase
Four.
At all cost, resist the temptation to hurry to the climax of your seduc-
tion, or to improvise. You are not being seductive but selfish. Everything in
daily life is hurried and improvised, and you need to offer something differ-
ent. By taking your time and respecting the seductive process you will not
only break down your victim's resistance, you will make them fall in love.
Phase One
Separation—
Stirring Interest and Desire
Your victims live in their own worlds, their minds occupied with
anxieties and daily concerns. Your goal in this initial phase is to
slowly separate them from that closed world and fill their minds
with thoughts of you. Once you have decided whom to seduce
(1: Choose the right victim), your first task is to get your vic-
tims' attention, to stir interest in you. For those who might be
more resistant or difficult, you should try a slower and more in-
sidious approach, first winning their friendship (2: Create a
false sense of security—approach indirectly); for those who are
bored and less difficult to reach, a more dramatic approach will
work, either fascinating them with a mysterious presence (3:
Send mixed signals) or seeming to be someone who is coveted
and fought over by others (4: Appear to be an object of desire).
Once the victim is properly intrigued, you need to transform
their interest into something stronger—desire. Desire is generally
preceded by feelings of emptiness, of something missing inside
that needs fulfillment. You must deliberately instill such feelings,
make your victims aware of the adventure and romance that are
lacking in their lives (5: Create a need—stir anxiety and dis-
content). If they see you as the one to fill their emptiness, inter-
est will blossom into desire. The desire should be stoked by
subtly planting ideas in their minds, hints of the seductive plea-
sures that await them (6: Master the art of insinuation). Mir-
roring your victims' values, indulging them in their wants and
moods will charm and delight them (7: Enter their spirit).
Without realizing how it has happened, more and more of their
thoughts now revolve around you. The time has come for some-
thing stronger. Lure them with an irresistible pleasure or adven-
ture (8: Create temptation) and they will follow your lead.
