Opening a Wound
In the coal-mining town of Eastwood, in central England, David Herbert
Lawrence was considered something of a strange lad. Pale and delicate,
he had no time for games or boyish pursuits, but was interested in litera-
ture; and he preferred the company of girls, who made up most of his
friends. Lawrence often visited the Chambers family, who had been his
neighbors until they moved out of Eastwood to a farm not far away. He
liked to study with the Chambers sisters, particularly Jessie; she was shy and
serious, and getting her to open up and confide in him was a pleasurable
challenge. Jessie grew quite attached to Lawrence over the years, and they
became good friends.
One day in 1906, Lawrence, twenty-one at the time, did not show up
at the usual hour for his study session with Jessie. He finally arrived much
later, in a mood she had never seen before—preoccupied and quiet. Now it
was her turn to make him open up. Finally he talked: he felt she was getting
too close to him. What about her future? Whom would she marry? Cer-
tainly not him, he said, for they were just friends. But it was unfair of him
to keep her from seeing others. They should of course remain friends and
have their talks, but maybe less often. When he finished and left, she felt a
strange emptiness. She had yet to think much about love or marriage. Sud-
denly she had doubts. What would her future be? Why wasn't she thinking
about it? She felt anxious and upset, without understanding why.
Lawrence continued to visit, but everything had changed. He criticized
her for this and that. She wasn't very physical. What kind of wife would
she make anyway? A man needed more from a woman than just talk. He
likened her to a nun. They began to see each other less often. When, some
time later, Lawrence accepted a teaching position at a school outside Lon-
don, she felt part relieved to be rid of him for a while. But when he said
goodbye to her, and intimated that it might be for the last time, she broke
down and cried. Then he started sending her weekly letters. He would
write about girls he was seeing; maybe one of them would be his wife. Fi-
nally, at his behest, she visited him in London. They got along well, as in
the old times, but he continued to badger her about her future, picking at
that old wound. At Christmas he was back in Eastwood, and when he vis-
ited her he seemed exultant. He had decided that it was Jessie he should
marry, that he had in fact been attracted to her all along. They should keep
it quiet for a while; although his writing career was taking off (his firstNo one can fall in love if
he is even partially satisfied
with what he has or who
he is. The experience of
falling in love originates in
an extreme depression, an
inability to find something
that has value in everyday
life. The "symptom" of
the predisposition to fall in
love is not the conscious
desire to do so, the intense
desire to enrich our lives; it
is the profound sense of
being worthless and of
having nothing that is
valuable and the shame of
not having it. . . . For this
reason, falling in love
occurs more frequently
among young people, since
they are profoundly
uncertain, unsure of their
worth, and often ashamed
of themselves. The same
thing applies to people of
other ages when they lose
something in their lives—
when their youth ends or
when they start to grow
old.
—FRANCESCO ALBERONI,
FALLING IN LOVE, TRANSLATED
BY LAWRENCE VENUTI
205
206 • The Art of Seduction
novel was about to be published), he needed to make more money. Caught
off guard by this sudden announcement, and overwhelmed with happiness,
Jessie agreed to everything, and they became lovers.
Soon, however, the familiar pattern repeated: criticisms, breakups, an-
nouncements that he was engaged to another girl. This only deepened his
hold on her. It was not until 1912 that she finally decided never to see him
again, disturbed by his portrayal of her in the autobiographical novel Sons
and Lovers. But Lawrence remained a lifelong obsession for her.
In 1913, a young English woman named Ivy Low, who had read
Lawrence's novels, began to correspond with him, her letters gushing with
admiration. By now Lawrence was married, to a German woman, the
Baroness Frieda von Richthofen. To Low's surprise, though, he invited her
to visit him and his wife in Italy. She knew he was probably something of a
Don Juan, but was eager to meet him, and accepted his invitation.
Lawrence was not what she had expected: his voice was high-pitched, his
eyes were piercing, and there was something vaguely feminine about him.
Soon they were taking walks together, with Lawrence confiding in Low.
She felt that they were becoming friends, which delighted her. Then sud-
denly, just before she was to leave, he launched into a series of criticisms of
her—she was so unspontaneous, so predictable, less human being than ro-
bot. Devastated by this unexpected attack, she nevertheless had to agree—
what he had said was true. What could he have seen in her in the first
place? Who was she anyway? Low left Italy feeling empty—but then
Lawrence continued to write to her, as if nothing had happened. She soon
realized that she had fallen hopelessly in love with him, despite everything
he had said to her. Or was it not despite what he had said, but because of it?
In 1914, the writer John Middleton-Murry received a letter from
Lawrence, a good friend of his. In the letter, out of nowhere, Lawrence
criticized Middleton-Murry for being passionless and not gallant enough
with his wife, the novelist Katherine Mansfield. Middleton-Murry later
wrote, "I had never felt for a man before what his letter made me feel for
him. It was a new thing, a unique thing, in my experience; and it was to re-
main unique." He felt that beneath Lawrence's criticisms lay some weird
kind of affection. Whenever he saw Lawrence from then on, he felt a
strange physical attraction that he could not explain.
Interpretation. The number of women, and of men, who fell under
Lawrence's spell is astonishing given how unpleasant he could be. In almost
every case the relationship began in friendship—with frank talks, exchanges
of confidences, a spiritual bond. Then, invariably, he would suddenly turn
against them, voicing harsh personal criticisms. He would know them well
by that time, and the criticisms were often quite accurate, and hit a nerve.
This would inevitably trigger confusion in his victims, and a sense of anxi-
ety, a feeling that something was wrong with them. Jolted out of their usual
sense of normality, they would feel divided inside. With half of their minds"What can Love be
then?" I said. "A
mortal?" "Far from it."
"Well, what?" "As in my
previous examples, he is
half-way between mortal
and immortal." What sort
of being is he then,
Diotima?" "He is a great
spirit, Socrates; everything
that is of the nature of a
spirit is half-god and half-
man." . . . "Who are his
parents?" I asked. "That
is rather a long story," she
answered, "but I will tell
you. On the day that
Aphrodite was born the
gods were feasting, among
them Contrivance the son
of Invention; and after
dinner, seeing that a party
was in progress, Poverty
came to beg and stood at
the door. Now Contrivance
was drunk with nectar—
wine, I may say, had not
yet been discovered—and
went out into the garden of
Zeus, and was overcome by
sleep. So Poverty, thinking
to alleviate her wretched
condition by bearing a child
to Contrivance, lay with
him and conceived Love.
Since Love was begotten on
Aphrodite's birthday, and
since he has also an innate
passion for the beautiful,
and so for the beauty of
Aphrodite herself, he
became her follower and
servant. Again, having
Contrivance for his father
and Poverty for his
mother, he bears the
following character. He is
always poor, and, far from
being sensitive and
beautiful, as most people
imagine, he is hard and
weather-beaten, shoeless
and homeless, always
sleeping out for want of a
bed, on the ground, on
doorsteps, and in the street.
So far he takes after his
mother and lives in want.
But, being also his father's
