Use the Demonic Power of Words to Sow Confusion • 259
we return to yet another story about ourselves. As early as childhood we
learn to tune out this kind of noise (particularly when it comes from our
parents).
Music, on the other hand, is seductive, and gets under our skin. It is in-
tended for pleasure. A melody or rhythm stays in our blood for days after we
have heard it, altering our moods and emotions, relaxing or exciting us. To
make music instead of noise, you must say things that please—things that re-
late to people's lives, that touch their vanity. If they have many problems,
you can produce the same effect by distracting them, focusing their attention
away from themselves by saying things that are witty and entertaining, or
that make the future seem bright and hopeful. Promises and flattery are mu-
sic to anyone's ears. This is language designed to move people and lower
their resistance. It is language designed for them, not directed at them.
The Italian writer Gabriele D'Annunzio was physically unattractive, yet
women could not resist him. Even those who knew of his Don Juan repu-
tation and disliked him for it (the actress Eleanora Duse and the dancer
Isadora Duncan, for instance) fell under his spell. The secret was the flow of
words in which he enveloped a woman. His voice was musical, his language
poetic, and most devastating of all, he knew how to flatter. His flattery was
aimed precisely at a woman's weaknesses, the areas where she needed vali-
dation. A woman was beautiful, yet lacked confidence in her own wit and
intelligence? He made sure to say that he was bewitched not by her beauty
but by her mind. He might compare her to a heroine of literature, or to a
carefully chosen mythological figure. Talking to him, her ego would dou-
ble in size.
Flattery is seductive language in its purest form. Its purpose is not to
express a truth or a real feeling, but only to create an effect on the recipient.
Like D'Annunzio, learn to aim your flattery directly at a person's insecuri-
ties. For instance, if a man is a fine actor and feels confident about his pro-
fessional skills, to flatter him about his acting will have little effect, and may
even accomplish the opposite—he could feel that he is above the need to
have his ego stroked, and your flattery will seem to say otherwise. But let us
say that this actor is an amateur musician or painter. He does this work on
his own, without professional support or publicity, and he is well aware that
others make their living at it. Flattery of his artistic pretensions will go
straight to his head and earn you double points. Learn to sniff out the parts
of a person's ego that need validation. Make it a surprise, something no one
else has thought to flatter before—something you can describe as a talent or
positive quality that others have not noticed. Speak with a little tremor, as if
your target's charms had overwhelmed you and made you emotional.
Flattery can be a kind of verbal foreplay. Aphrodite's powers of seduc-
tion, which were said to come from the magnificent girdle she wore, in-
volved a sweetness of language—a skill with the soft, flattering words that
prepare the way for erotic thoughts. Insecurities and nagging self-doubts
have a dampening effect on the libido. Make your targets feel secure and al-
luring through your flattering words and their resistance will melt away.honorable men. \ I will not
do them wrong. . . . \ But
here's a parchment with the
seal of Caesar. \ I found it
in his closet; 'tis his will. \
Let but the commons hear
this testament, \ Which
(pardon me) I do not mean
to read, \And they would
go and kiss dead Caesar's
wounds \ And dip their
napkins in his sacred
blood. . . . \ PLEBEIAN:
We'll hear the will! Read
it, Mark Antony. \ ALL:
The will, the will! We will
hear Caesar's will! \
ANTONY: Have patience,
gentle friends; I must not
read it. \ It is not meet you
know how Caesar loved
you. \ You are not wood,
you are not stones, but
men; \ And being men,
hearing the will of Caesar,
\ It will inflame you, it
will make you mad. \ 'Tis
good you know not that
you are his heirs; \ For if
you should, O, what
would come of it? . . . \ If
you have tears, prepare to
shed them now. \ You all
do know this mantle. I
remember \ The first time
ever Caesar put it on. . . .
\ Look, in this place ran
Cassius' dagger through. \
See what a rent the
envious Casca made. \
Through this the well-
beloved Brutus stabbed; \
And as he plucked his
cursed steel away, \ Mark
how the blood of Caesar
followed it. . . . \ For
Brutus, as you know, was
Caesar's angel. \ Judge, O
you gods, how dearly
Caesar loved him! \ This
was the most unkindest cut
of all; \ For when the noble
Caesar saw him stab, \
Ingratitude, more strong
than traitors' arms, \ Quite
vanquished him. . . . \ O,
now you weep, and I
perceive you feel \ The dint
of pity. These are gracious
260 • The Art of Seduction
Sometimes the most pleasant thing to hear is the promise of something
wonderful, a vague but rosy future that is just around the corner. President
Franklin Delano Roosevelt, in his public speeches, talked little about spe-
cific programs for dealing with the Depression; instead he used rousing
rhetoric to paint a picture of America's glorious future. In the various leg-
ends of Don Juan, the great seducer would immediately focus women's at-
tention on the future, a fantastic world to which he promised to whisk
them off. Tailor your sweet words to your targets' particular problems and
fantasies. Promise something realizable, something possible, but do not
make it too specific; you are inviting them to dream. If they are mired in
dull routine, talk of adventure, preferably with you. Do not discuss how it
will be accomplished; speak as if it magically already existed, somewhere in
the future. Lift people's thoughts into the clouds and they will relax, their
defenses will come down, and it will be that much easier to maneuver and
lead them astray. Your words become a kind of elevating drug.
The most anti-seductive form of language is argument. How many
silent enemies do we create by arguing? There is a superior way to get peo-
ple to listen and be persuaded: humor and a light touch. The nineteenth-
century English politician Benjamin Disraeli was a master at this game. In
Parliament, to fail to reply to an accusation or slanderous comment was a
deadly mistake: silence meant the accuser was right. Yet to respond angrily,
to get into an argument, was to look ugly and defensive. Disraeli used a dif-
ferent tactic: he stayed calm. When the time came to reply to an attack, he
would slowly make his way to the speaker's table, pause, then utter a hu-
morous or sarcastic retort. Everyone would laugh. Now that he had
warmed people up, he would proceed to refute his enemy, still mixing in
amusing comments; or perhaps he would simply move on to another sub-
ject, as if he were above it all. His humor took out the sting of any attack
on him. Laughter and applause have a domino effect: once your listeners
have laughed, they are more likely to laugh again. In this lighthearted mood
they are also more apt to listen. A subtle touch and a bit of irony give you
room to persuade them, move them to your side, mock your enemies. That
is the seductive form of argument.
Shortly after the murder of Julius Caesar, the head of the band of con-
spirators who had killed him, Brutus, addressed an angry mob. He tried to
reason with the crowd, explaining that he had wanted to save the Roman
Republic from dictatorship. The people were momentarily convinced—
yes, Brutus seemed a decent man. Then Mark Antony took the stage, and
he in turn delivered a eulogy for Caesar. He seemed overwhelmed with
emotion. He talked of his love for Caesar, and of Caesar's love for the
Roman people. He mentioned Caesar's will; the crowd clamored to hear it,
but Antony said no, for if he read it they would know how deeply Caesar
had loved them, and how dastardly this murder was. The crowd again in-
sisted he read the will; instead he held up Caesar's bloodstained cloak, not-
ing its rents and tears. This was where Brutus had stabbed the great general,
he said; Cassius had stabbed him here. Then finally he read the will, whichdrops. \ Kind souls, what
weep you when you but
behold \ Our Caesar's
vesture wounded? Look
you here! \ Here is himself,
marred as you see until
traitors.
—WILLIAM SHAKESPEARE,
JULIUS CAESAR
