270 • The Art of Seduction
her charms, he held her hand and told her how much she resembled her
mother, whom he once had loved. She trembled—not with excitement,
however, but with fear, for although he was not her father, he was supposed
to be her protector, not a suitor. Her attendants were away and it was a
beautiful night. Genji silently threw off his perfumed robe and pulled her
down beside him. She began to cry, and to resist. Always a gentleman,
Genji told her that he would respect her wishes, he would always care for
her, and she had nothing to fear. He then politely excused himself.
Several days later Genji was helping Tamakazura with her correspon-
dence when he read a love letter from his younger brother, Prince Hotaru,
who numbered among her suitors. In the letter, Hotaru berated Tama-
kazura for not letting him get physically close enough to talk to her and tell
her his feelings. Tamakazura had not replied; unused to the manners of the
court, she had felt shy and intimidated. As if to help her, Genji got one of
his servants to write to Hotaru in her name. The letter, written on beauti-
ful perfumed paper, warmly invited the prince to visit her.
Hotaru appeared at the appointed hour. He smelled a beguiling in-
cense, mysterious and seductive. (Mixed into this scent was Genji's own
perfume.) The prince felt a wave of excitement. Approaching the screen
behind which Tamakazura sat, he confessed his love for her. Without mak-
ing a sound, she retreated to another screen, farther away. Suddenly there
was a flash of light, as if a torch had flared up, and Hotaru saw her profile
behind the screen: she was more beautiful than he had imagined. Two
things delighted the prince: the sudden, mysterious flash of light, and the
brief glimpse of his beloved. Now he was truly in love.
Hotaru began to court her assiduously. Meanwhile, feeling reassured that
Genji was no longer chasing her, Tamakazura saw her protector more often.
And now she could not help noticing little details: Genji's robes seemed to
glow, in pleasing and vibrant colors, as if dyed by unworldly hands. Hotaru's
robes seemed drab by comparison. And the perfumes burned into Genji's
garments, how intoxicating they were. No one else bore such a scent. Ho-
taru's letters were polite and well written, but the letters Genji sent her were
on magnificent paper, perfumed and dyed, and they quoted lines of poetry,
always surprising yet always appropriate for the occasion. Genji also grew
and gathered flowers—wild carnations, for instance—that he gave as gifts
and that seemed to symbolize his unique charm.
One evening Genji proposed to teach Tamakazura how to play the
koto. She was delighted. She loved to read romance novels, and whenever
Genji played the koto, she felt as if she were transported into one of her
books. No one played the instrument better than Genji; she would be hon-
ored to learn from him. Now he saw her often, and the method of his
lessons was simple: she would choose a song for him to play, and then
would try to imitate him. After they played, they would lie down side by
side, their heads resting on the koto, staring up at the moon. Genji would
have torches set up in the garden, giving the view the softest glow.
The more Tamakazura saw of the court—of Prince Hotaru, the otherFor years after her entry
into the palace, a large
number of court-maidens
were especially set aside for
preparing Kuei-fei 's
dresses, which were chosen
and fashioned according to
the flowers of the season.
For instance, for New Year
(spring) she had blossoms
of apricot, plum and
narcissus; for summer, she
adopted the lotus; for
autumn, she patterned
them after the peony; for
winter, she employed the
chrysanthemum. Of
jewelry she was fondest of
pearls, and the finest
products of the world found
their way into her boudoir
and were frequently
embroidered on her
numerous dresses. • Kuei-
fei was the embodiment of
all that was lovely and
extravagant. No wonder
that no king, prince,
courtier or humble
attendant who ever met her
could resist the allurement
of her charms. Besides, she
was the most artful of
women and knew how to
use her natural gifts to the
best purpose. . . . The
Emperor Ming Huang,
supreme in the land and
with thousands of the most
handsome maidens to
choose from, became a
complete slave to her
magnetic powers . . .
spending day and night in
her company and giving up
his whole kingdom
for her sake.
—SHU-CHIUNG, YANG KUEI-
FEI: THE MOST FAMOUS
BEAUTY OF CHINA
Then [Pao-yu] called
Bright Design to him and
said to her, "Go and see
what [Black Jade] is doing.
If she asks about me, just
say that I am quite all
Pay Attention to Detail • 271
suitors, the emperor himself—the more she realized that none could com-
pare to Genji. He was supposed to be her protector, yes, that was still true,
but was it such a sin to fall in love with him? Confused, she found herself
giving in to the caresses and kisses that he began to surprise her with, now
that she was too weak to resist.
Interpretation. Genji is the protagonist in the eleventh-century novel The
Tale of Genji, written by Murasaki Shikibu, a woman of the Heian court.
The character was most likely inspired by the real-life seducer Fujiwara no
Korechika.
In his seduction of Tamakazura, Genji's strategy was simple: he would
make her realize indirectly how charming and irresistible he was by sur-
rounding her with unspoken details. He also brought her in contact with
his brother; comparison with this drab, stiff figure would make Genji's su-
periority clear. The night Hotaru first visited her, Genji set everything up,
as if to support Hotaru's seducing—the mysterious scent, then the flash of
light by the screen. (The light came from a novel effect: earlier in the eve-
ning, Genji had collected hundreds of fireflies in a cloth bag. At the proper
moment he let them all go at once.) But when Tamakazura saw Genji en-
couraging Hotaru's pursuit of her, her defenses against her protector re-
laxed, allowing her senses to be filled by this master of seductive effects.
Genji orchestrated every possible detail—the scented paper, the colored
robes, the lights in the garden, the wild carnations, the apt poetry, the koto
lessons which induced an irresistible feeling of harmony. Tamakazura found
herself dragged into a sensual whirlpool. Bypassing the shyness and mistrust
that words or actions would only have worsened, Genji surrounded his
ward with objects, sights, sounds, and scents that symbolized the pleasure of
his company far more than his actual physical presence would have—in fact
his presence could only have been threatening. He knew that a young girl's
senses are her most vulnerable point.
The key to Genji's masterful orchestration of detail was his attention to
the target of his seduction. Like Genji, you must attune your own senses to
your targets, watching them carefully, adapting to their moods. You sense
when they are defensive and retreat. You also sense when they are giving in,
and move forward. In between, the details you set up—gifts, entertain-
ments, the clothes you wear, the flowers you choose—are aimed precisely
at their tastes and predilections. Genji knew he was dealing with a young
girl who loved romantic novels; his wild flowers, koto playing, and poetry
brought their world to life for her. Attend to your targets' every move and
desire, and reveal your attentiveness in the details and objects you surround
them with, filling their senses with the mood you need to inspire. They can
argue with your words, but not with the effect you have on their senses.right now. " • "You'll have
to think of a better excuse
than that," Bright Design
said. "Isn't there anything
that you can send or want
to borrow? I don't want to
go there and feel like a fool
without anything to say. " •
Pao-yu thought for a
moment and then took two
handkerchiefs from under
his pillow and gave them
to the maid, saying, "Well
then, tell her that I sent
you with these," • "What
a strange present to send"
the maid smiled. "What
does she want two old
handkerchiefs for? She will
be angry again and say
that you are trying to make
fun of her." • "Don't
worry" Pao-yu assured her.
"She will understand." •
Black Jade had already
retired when Bright Design
arrived at the Bamboo
Retreat. "What brought
you at this hour?" Black
Jade asked. • "[Pao-yu]
asked me to bring these
handkerchiefs for [Black
Jade]." • For a moment
Black Jade was at a loss to
see why Pao-yu should
send her such a present at
that particular moment.
She said, "I suppose they
must be something unusual
that somebody gave him.
Tell him to keep them
himself or give them to
someone who will
appreciate them. I have no
need of them." • "They
are nothing unusual,"
Bright Design said. "Just
two ordinary handkerchiefs
that he happened to have
around. " Black Jade was
even more puzzled, and
then it suddenly dawned
upon her: Pao-yu knew
that she would weep for
him and so sent two
handkerchiefs of his own. •
"You can leave them,
then," she said to Bright
Design, who in turn was
