388 • The Art of Seduction
intrusive. If you are always in their face, always the aggressor, they will be-
come used to being passive, and the tension in your seduction will flag. Use
letters to make them think about you all the time, to feed their imagina-
tion. Cultivate mystery—stop them from figuring you out. Baudelaire's let-
ters were delightfully ambiguous, mixing the physical and the spiritual,
teasing Sabatier with their multiplicity of possible interpretations.
Then, at the point when they are ripe with desire and interest, when
perhaps they are expecting you to make a move—as Madame Sabatier ex-
pected that day in her apartment—take a step back. You are unexpectedly
distant, friendly but no more than that—certainly not sexual. Let this sink
in for a day or two. Your withdrawal will trigger anxiety; the only way to
relieve this anxiety is to pursue and possess you. Step back now and you
make your targets fall into your arms like ripe fruit, blind to the force of
gravity that is drawing them to you. The more they participate, the more
their willpower is engaged, the deeper the erotic effect. You have chal-
lenged them to use their own seductive powers on you, and when they re-
spond, the tables will turn and they will pursue you with desperate energy.
/ retreat and thereby teach her to be victorious as she pur-
sues me. I continually fall back, and in this backward
movement I teach her to know through me all the powers of
erotic love, its turbulent thoughts, its passion, what longing
is, and hope, and impatient expectancy.
—SØREN KIERKEGAARD
Keys to Seduction
Since humans are naturally obstinate and willful creatures, and prone to
suspicions of people's motives, it is only natural, in the course of any se-
duction, that in some ways your target will resist you. Seductions, then, are
rarely easy or without setbacks. But once your victims overcome some of
their doubts, and begin to fall under your spell, they will reach a point
where they start to let go. They may sense that you are leading them along,
but they are enjoying it. No one likes things to be complicated and diffi-
cult, and your target will expect the conclusion to come quickly. That is
the point, however, where you must train yourself to hold back. Deliver
the pleasurable climax they are so greedily awaiting, succumb to the natural
tendency to bring the seduction to a rapid end, and you will have missed an
opportunity to ratchet up the tension, to make the affair more heated. After
all, you don't want a passive little victim to toy with; you want the seduced
to engage their will in all its force, to become active participants in the se-
duction. You want them to pursue you, hopelessly ensnaring themselves in
your web in the process. The only way to accomplish this is to take a step
back and make them anxious.
You have strategically retreated before (see chapter 12), but this is dif-before him. At times I was
like a stranger to him; at
times he surrendered
completely. Then when I
threw my arms around
him, everything changed,
and I embraced a cloud.
—CORDELIA DESCRIBING
JOHANNES, IN SØREN
KIERKEGAARD, THE SEDUCER'S
DIARY, TRANSLATED BY HOWARD
V. HONG AND EDNA V. HONG
It is true that we could not
love if there were not some
memory in us—to the
greatest extent an
unconscious memory—that
we were once loved. But
neither could we love if this
feeling of being loved had
not at some time suffered
doubt; if we had always
been sure of it. In other
words, love would not be
possible without having
been loved and then having
missed the certainty of
being loved. . . . • The
need to be loved is not
elementary. This need is
certainly acquired by
experience in later
childhood. It would be
better to say: by many
experiences or by a
repetition of similar ones. I
believe that these
experiences are of a
negative kind. The child
becomes aware that he is
not loved or that his
mother's love is not
unconditional. The baby
learns that his mother can
be dissatisfied with him,
that she can withdraw her
affection if he does not
behave as she wishes, that
she can be angry or cross. I
believe that this experience
arouses feelings of anxiety
in the infant. The
possibility of losing his
mother's love certainly
strikes the child with a
force which can no more be
Give Them Space to Fall—The Pursuer Is Pursued • 389
ferent. The target is falling for you now, and your retreat will lead to pan-
icky thoughts: you are losing interest, it is somehow my fault, perhaps it is
something I have done. Rather than think you are rejecting them on your
own, your targets will want to make this interpretation, since if the cause of
the problem is something they have done, they have the power to win you
back by changing their behavior. If you are simply rejecting them, on the
other hand, they have no control. People always want to preserve hope.
Now they will come to you, turn aggressive, thinking that will do the trick.
They will raise the erotic temperature. Understand: a person's willpower is
directly linked to their libido, their erotic desire. When your victims are
passively waiting for you, their erotic level is low. When they turn pursuer,
getting involved in the process, brimming with tension and anxiety, the
temperature is raised. So raise it as high as you can.
When you withdraw, make it subtle; you are instilling unease. Your
coldness or distance should dawn on your targets when they are alone, in
the form of a poisonous doubt creeping into their mind. Their paranoia
will become self-generating. Your subtle step back will make them want to
possess you, so they will willingly advance into your arms without being
pushed. This is different from the strategy in chapter 20, in which you are
inflicting deep wounds, creating a pattern of pain and pleasure. There the
goal is to make your victims weak and dependent, here it is to make them
active and aggressive. Which strategy you prefer to use (the two cannot be
combined) depends on what you want and the proclivities of your victim.
In Søren Kierkegaard's The Seducer's Diary, Johannes aims to seduce the
young and beautiful Cordelia. He begins by being rather intellectual with
her, and slowly intriguing her. Then he sends her letters that are romantic
and seductive. Now her fascination blossoms into love. Although in person
he remains a little distant, she senses in him great depths and is certain that
he loves her. Then one day, while they're talking, Cordelia has a strange
sensation: something about him is different. He seems more interested in
ideas than in her. Over the next few days, this doubt gets stronger—the let-
ters are a little less romantic, something is missing. Feeling anxious, she
slowly turns aggressive, becomes the pursuer instead of the pursued. The
seduction is now much more exciting, at least for Johannes.
Johannes's step back is subtle; he merely gives Cordelia the impression
that his interest is a little less romantic than the day before. He returns to
being the intellectual. This stirs the worrisome thought that her natural
charms and beauty no longer have as much effect on him. She must try
harder, provoke him sexually, prove to herself that she has some power over
him. She is now brimming with erotic desire, brought to that point by Jo-
hannes's subtle withdrawal of affection.
Each gender has its own seductive lures, which come naturally to them.
When you seem interested in someone but do not respond sexually, it is
disturbing, and presents a challenge: they will find a way to seduce you. To
produce this effect, first reveal an interest in your targets, through letters or
subtle insinuation. But when you are in their presence, assume a kind ofcoped with than an
earthquake. . . . • The
child who experiences his
mother's dissatisfaction and
apparent withdrawal of
affection reacts to this
menace at first with fear. He
tries to regain what seems
lost by expressing hostility
and aggressiveness. . . .
The change of its character
comes about only after
failure; when the child
realizes that the effort is a
failure. And now
something very strange
takes place, something
which is foreign to our
conscious thinking but
which is very near to the
infantile way. Instead of
grasping the object directly
and taking possession of it
in an aggressive way, the
child identifies with the
object as it was before. The
child does the same that
the mother did to him in
that happy time which has
passed. The process is very
illuminating because it
shapes the pattern of love
in general. The little boy
thus demonstrates in his
own behavior what he
wants his mother to do to
him, how she should
behave to him. He
announces this wish by
displaying his tenderness
and affection toward his
mother who gave these
before to him. It is an
attempt to overcome the
despair and sense of loss in
taking over the role of the
mother. The boy tries to
demonstrate what he
wishes by doing it himself:
look, I would like you to
act thus toward me, to be
thus tender and loving to
me. Of course this attitude
is not the result of
consideration or reasoned
planning but an emotional
process by identification, a
natural exchange of roles
with the unconscious aim
