Prove Yourself • 329
danger, about heading into the unknown. Show that you have a reckless
streak and a daring nature, that you lack the usual fear of death, and you are
instantly fascinating to the bulk of humanity.
What you are proving in this instance is not how you feel toward an-
other person but something about yourself: you are willing to go out on a
limb. You are not just another talker and braggart. It is a recipe for instant
charisma. Any political figure—Churchill, de Gaulle, Kennedy—who has
proven himself on the battlefield has an unmatchable appeal. Many had
thought of D'Annunzio as a foppish womanizer; his experience in the war
gave him a heroic sheen, a Napoleonic aura. In fact he had always been an
effective seducer, but now he was even more devilishly appealing. You do
not necessarily have to risk death, but putting yourself in its vicinity will
give you a seductive charge. (It is often best to do this some way into the
seduction, making it come as a pleasant surprise.) You are willing to enter
the unknown. No one is more seductive than the person who has had a
brush with death. People will be drawn to you; perhaps they are hoping
that some of your adventurous spirit will rub off on them.
4. According to one version of the Arthurian legend, the great knight Sir
Lancelot once caught a glimpse of Queen Guinevere, King Arthur's wife,
and that glimpse was enough—he fell madly in love. And so when word
reached him that Queen Guinevere had been kidnapped by an evil knight,
Lancelot did not hesitate—he forgot his other chivalrous tasks and hurried
in pursuit. His horse collapsed from the chase, so he continued on foot. Fi-
nally it seemed that he was close, but he was exhausted and could go no
farther. A horse-driven cart passed by; the cart was filled with loathsome-
looking men shackled together. In those days it was the tradition to place
criminals—murderers, traitors, cowards, thieves—in such a cart, which
then passed through every street in town so that people could see it. Once
you had ridden in the cart, you lost all feudal rights for the rest of your life.
The cart was such a dreadful symbol that seeing an empty one made you
shiver and give the sign of the cross. Even so, Sir Lancelot accosted the
cart's driver, a dwarf: "In the name of God, tell me if you've seen my lady
the queen pass by this way?" "If you want to get into this cart I'm driving,"
said the dwarf, "by tomorrow you'll know what has become of the queen."
Then he drove the cart onward. Lancelot hesitated for but two of the
horse's steps, then ran after it and climbed in.
Wherever the cart went, townspeople heckled it. They were most curi-
ous about the knight among the passengers. What was his crime? How will
he be put to death—flayed? Drowned? Burned upon a fire of thorns? Fi-
nally the dwarf let him get out, without a word as to the whereabouts of
the queen. To make matters worse, no one now would go near or talk to
Lancelot, for he had been in the cart. He kept on chasing the queen, and all
along the way he was cursed at, spat upon, challenged by other knights. Hehaving so fully tested the
love and obedience he had
shown towards her, it was
but just that he should be
rewarded for his long
patience. Of the lover's joy
on hearing this you need
have no doubt, and he
failed not to arrive at the
appointed time. • But the
lady, still wishing to try the
strength of his love, had
said to her beautiful
damsel—"I am well aware
of the love a certain
nobleman bears to you,
and I think you are no less
in love with him; and I feel
so much pity for you both,
that I have resolved to
afford you time and place
that you may converse
together at your ease." •
The damsel was so
enchanted that she could
not conceal her longings,
but answered that she
would not fail to be
present. • In obedience,
therefore, to her mistress's
counsel and command, she
undressed herself and lay
down on a handsome bed,
in a room the door of
which the lady left half
open, whilst within she set
a light so that the maiden's
beauty might be clearly
seen. Then she herself
pretended to go away, but
hid herself near to the bed
so carefully that she could
not be seen. • Her poor
lover, thinking to find her
according to her promise,
failed not to enter the room
as softly as he could, at the
appointed hour; and after
he had shut the door and
put off his garments and
fur shoes, he got into the
bed, where he looked to
find what he desired. But
no sooner did he put out
his arms to embrace her
whom he believed to be his
mistress, than the poor girl,
believing him entirely her
330 • The Art of Seduction
had disgraced knighthood by riding in the cart. But no one could stop him
or slow him down, and finally he discovered that the queen's kidnapper was
the wicked Meleagant. He caught up with Meleagant and the two fought a
duel. Still weak from the chase, Lancelot seemed to be near defeat, but
when word reached him that the queen was watching the battle, he recov-
ered his strength and was on the verge of killing Meleagant when a truce
was called. Guinevere was handed over to him.
Lancelot could hardly contain his joy at the thought of finally being in
his lady's presence. But to his shock, she seemed angry, and would not look
at her rescuer. She told Meleagant's father, "Sire, in truth he has wasted his
efforts. I shall always deny that I feel any gratitude toward him." Lancelot
was mortified but he did not complain. Much later, after undergoing innu-
merable further trials, she finally relented and they became lovers. One day
he asked her: when she had been abducted by Meleagant, had she heard the
story of the cart, and how he had disgraced knighthood? Was that why she
had treated him so coldly that day? The queen replied, "By delaying for
two steps you showed your unwillingness to climb into it. That, to tell the
truth, is why I didn't wish to see you or speak with you."
Interpretation. The opportunity to do your selfless deed often comes upon
you suddenly. You have to show your worth in an instant, right there on
the spot. It could be a rescue situation, a gift you could make or a favor you
could do, a sudden request to drop everything and come to their aid. What
matters most is not whether you act rashly, make a mistake, and do some-
thing foolish, but that you seem to act on their behalf without thought for
yourself or the consequences.
At moments like these, hesitation, even for a few seconds, can ruin all
the hard work of your seduction, revealing you as self-absorbed, unchival-
rous, and cowardly. This, at any rate, is the moral of Chrétien de Troyes's
twelfth-century version of the story of Lancelot. Remember: not only
what you do matters, but how you do it. If you are naturally self-absorbed,
learn to disguise it. React as spontaneously as possible, exaggerating the ef-
fect by seeming flustered, overexcited, even foolish—love has driven you to
that point. If you have to jump into the cart for Guinevere's sake, make sure
she sees that you do it without the slightest hesitation.
5. In Rome sometime around 1531, word spread of a sensational young
woman named Tullia d'Aragona. By the standards of the period, Tullia was
not a classic beauty; she was tall and thin, at a time when the plump and
voluptuous woman was considered the ideal. And she lacked the cloying,
giggling manner of most young girls who wanted masculine attention. No,
her quality was nobler. Her Latin was perfect, she could discuss the latest
literature, she played the lute and sang. In other words, she was a novelty,
and since that was all most men were looking for, they began to visit her inown, had her arms round
his neck, speaking to him
the while in such loving
words and with so
beautiful a countenance,
that there is not a hermit
so holy but he would have
forgotten his beads for love
of her. • But when the
gentleman recognized her
with both eye and ear, and
found he was not with her
for whose sake he had so
greatly suffered, the love
that had made him get so
quickly into the bed, made
him rise from it still more
quickly. And in anger
equally with mistress and
damsel, he said— "Neither
your folly nor the malice of
her who put you there can
make me other than I am.
But do you try to be an
honest woman, for you
shall never lose that good
name through me. " • So
saying he rushed out of the
room in the greatest wrath
imaginable, and it was long
before he returned to see his
mistress. However love,
which is never without
hope, assured him that the
greater and more manifest
his constancy was proved to
be by all these trials, the
longer and more delightful
would be his bliss. • The
lady, who had seen and
heard all that passed, was
so delighted and amazed at
beholding the depth and
constancy of his love, that
she was impatient to sec
him again in order to ask
h is fo rgiven ess for the
sorrow that she had caused
him to endure. And as
soon as she could meet
with him, she failed not to
address him in such
excellent and pleasant
words, that he not only
forgot all his troubles but
even deemed them very
fortunate, seeing that their
issue was to the glory of his
constancy and the perfect
