Contents • xv
10 Use the Demonic Power of Words to Sow Confusion page 251
It is hard to make people listen; they are consumed with their own thoughts and desires, and
have little time for yours. The trick to making them listen is to say what they want to hear, to
fill their ears with whatever is pleasant to them. This is the essence of seductive language. In-
flame people's emotions with loaded phrases, flatter them, comfort their insecurities, envelop
them in sweet words and promises, and not only will they listen to you, they will lose their
will to resist you.
11 Pay Attention to Detail page 265
Lofty words of love and grand gestures can be suspicious: Why are you trying so hard to
please? The details of a seduction—the subtle gestures, the offhand things you do—are often
more charming and revealing. You must learn to distract your victims with a myriad of pleas-
ant little rituals—thoughtful gifts tailored just for them, clothes and adornments designed to
please them, gestures that show the time and attention you are paying them. Mesmerized by
what they see, they will not notice what you are really up to.
12 Poeticize Your Presence page 277
Important things happen when your targets are alone: The slightest feeling of relief that you
are not there, and it is all over. Familiarity and overexposure will cause this reaction. Remain
elusive, then. Intrigue your targets by alternating an exciting presence with a cool distance,
exuberant moments followed by calculated absences. Associate yourself with poetic images and
objects, so that when they think of you, they begin to see you through an idealized halo. The
more you figure in their minds, the more they will envelop you in seductive fantasies.
13 Disarm Through Strategic Weakness and Vulnerability page 285
Too much maneuvering on your part may raise suspicion. The best way to cover your tracks is
to make the other person feel superior and stronger. If you seem to be weak, vulnerable, en-
thralled by the other person, and unable to control yourself you will make your actions look
more natural, less calculated. Physical weakness—tears, bashfulness, paleness—will help cre-
ate the effect. Play the victim, then transform your target's sympathy into love.
14 Confuse Desire and Reality—The Perfect Illusion page 295
To compensate for the difficulties in their lives, people spend a lot of their time daydreaming,
imagining a future full of adventure, success, and romance. If you can create the illusion that
through you they can live out their dreams, you will have them at your mercy. Aim at secret
wishes that have been thwarted or repressed, stirring up uncontrollable emotions, clouding their
powers of reason. Lead the seduced to a point of confusion in which they can no longer tell the
difference between illusion and reality.
15 Isolate the Victim page 309
An isolated person is weak. By slowly isolating your victims, you make them more vulnerable
to your influence. Take them away from their normal milieu, friends, family, home. Give them
the sense of being marginalized, in limbo—they are leaving one world behind and entering
another. Once isolated like this, they have no outside support, and in their confusion they are
easily led astray. Lure the seduced into your lair, where nothing is familiar.
xvi • Contents
Phase Three: The Precipice—Deepening the Effect Through Extreme Measures
16 Prove Yourself page 321
Most people want to be seduced. If they resist your efforts, it is probably because you ham' not
gone far enough to allay their doubts—about your motives, the depth of your feelings, and so
on. One well-timed action that shows how far you are willing to go to win them over will dis-
pel their doubts. Do not worry about looking foolish or making a mistake—any kind of deed
that is self-sacrificing and for your targets' sake will so overwhelm their emotions, they won't
notice anything else.
17 Effect a Regression page 333
People who have experienced a certain kind of pleasure in the past will try to repeat or relive
it. The deepest-rooted and most pleasurable memories are usually those from earliest child-
hood, and are often unconsciously associated with a parental figure. Bring your targets back to
that point by placing yourself in the oedipal triangle and positioning them as the needy child.
Unaware of the cause of their emotional response, they will fall in love with you.
18 Stir Up the Transgressive and Taboo page 349
There are always social limits on what one can do. Some of these, the most elemental taboos,
go back centuries; others are more superficial, simply defining polite and acceptable behavior.
Making your targets feel that you are leading them past either kind of limit is immensely se-
ductive. People yearn to explore their dark side. Once the desire to transgress draws your tar-
gets to you, it will be hard for them to stop. Take them farther than they imagined—the
shared feeling of guilt and complicity will create a powerful bond.
19 Use Spiritual Lures page 359
Everyone has doubts and insecurities—about their body, their self-worth, their sexuality. If
your seduction appeals exclusively to the physical, you will stir up these doubts and make your
targets self-conscious. Instead, lure them out of their insecurities by making them focus on
something sublime and spiritual: a religious experience, a lofty work of art, the occult. Lost in
a spiritual mist, the target will feel light and uninhibited. Deepen the effect of your seduction
by making its sexual culmination seem like the spiritual union of two souls.
20 Mix Pleasure with Pain page 369
The greatest mistake in seduction is being too nice. At first, perhaps, your kindness is charm-
ing, but it soon grows monotonous; you are trying too hard to please, and seem insecure. In-
stead of overwhelming your targets with niceness, try inflicting some pain. Make them feel
guilty and insecure. Instigate a breakup—now a rapprochement, a return to your earlier kind-
ness, will turn them weak at the knees. The lower the lows you create, the greater the highs.
To heighten the erotic charge, create the excitement of fear.
