Send Mixed Signals • 191
veyed by his clothes and poses.) But also send out a mixed signal—some
sign that you are not what you seem, a paradox. Do not worry if this
underquality is a negative one, like danger, cruelty, or amorality; people
will be drawn to the enigma anyway, and pure goodness is rarely seductive.
Paradox with him was only truth standing on its head to
attract attention.
—RICHARD LE GALLIENNE, ON HIS FRIEND OSCAR WILDE
Keys to Seduction
Nothing can proceed in seduction unless you can attract and hold your
victim's attention, your physical presence becoming a haunting men-
tal presence. It is actually quite easy to create that first stir—an alluring style
of dress, a suggestive glance, something extreme about you. But what hap-
pens next? Our minds are barraged with images—not just from media but
from the disorder of daily life. And many of these images are quite striking.
You become just one more thing screaming for attention; your attractive-
ness will pass unless you spark the more enduring kind of spell that makes
people think of you in your absence. That means engaging their imagina-
tions, making them think there is more to you than what they see. Once
they start embellishing your image with their fantasies, they are hooked.
This must, however, be done early on, before your targets know too
much and their impressions of you are set. It should occur the moment
they lay eyes on you. By sending mixed signals in that first encounter, you
create a little surprise, a little tension: you seem to be one thing (innocent,
brash, intellectual, witty), but you also throw them a glimpse of something
else (devilish, shy, spontaneous, sad). Keep things subtle: if the second
quality is too strong, you will seem schizophrenic. But make them wonder
why you might be shy or sad underneath your brash intellectual wit, and
you will have their attention. Give them an ambiguity that lets them see
what they want to see, capture their imagination with little voyeuristic
glimpses into your dark soul.
The Greek philosopher Socrates was one of history's greatest seducers;
the young men who followed him as students were not just fascinated by
his ideas, they fell in love with him. One such youth was Alcibiades, the
notorious playboy who became a powerful political figure near the end of
the fifth century B.C. In Plato's Symposium, Alcibiades describes Socrates's
seductive powers by comparing him to the little figures of Silenus that were
made back then. In Greek myth, Silenus was quite ugly, but also a wise
prophet. Accordingly the statues of Silenus were hollow, and when you
took them apart, you would find little figures of gods inside them—the in-
ner truth and beauty under the unappealing exterior. And so, for Alci-
biades, it was the same with Socrates, who was so ugly as to be repellent but
whose face radiated inner beauty and contentment. The effect was confus-grateful thanks to you!—
yet not forgetting a bone I
have to pick with you." •
"Ah, sweet woman, what
have I done?" was
courteous Rivalin's reply. •
"You have annoyed me
through a friend of mine,
the best I ever had. " •
"Good heavens," thought
he, "what does this mean?
What have I done to
displease her? What does
she say I have done?" and
he imagined that
unwittingly he must have
injured a kinsman of hers
some time at their knightly
sports and that was why
she was vexed with him.
But no, the friend she
referred to was her heart, in
which he made her suffer:
that was the friend she
spoke of But he knew
nothing of that. • "Lovely
woman," he said with all
his accustomed charm, "I
do not want you to be
angry with me or bear me
any ill will. So, if what
you tell me is true,
pronounce sentence on me
yourself: I will do whatever
you command." • "I do
not hate you overmuch for
what has happened," was
the sweet girl's answer,
"nor do I love you for it.
But to see what amends
you will make for the
wrong you have done me, I
shall test you another
time." • And so he bowed
as if to go, and she, lovely
girl, sighed at him most
secretly and said with
tender feeling: • "Ah, dear
friend, God bless you!"
From this time on the
thoughts of each ran on the
other. • Rivalin turned
away, pondering many
things. He pondered from
many sides why
Blancheflor should be
vexed, and what lay
behind it all. He
considered her greeting, her
192 • The Art of Seduction
ing and attractive. Antiquity's other great seducer, Cleopatra, also sent out
mixed signals: by all accounts physically alluring, in voice, face, body, and
manner, she also had a brilliantly active mind, which for many writers of
the time made her seem somewhat masculine in spirit. These contrary
qualities gave her complexity, and complexity gave her power.
To capture and hold attention, you need to show attributes that go
against your physical appearance, creating depth and mystery. If you have a
sweet face and an innocent air, let out hints of something dark, even
vaguely cruel in your character. It is not advertised in your words, but in
your manner. The actor Errol Flynn had a boyishly angelic face and a slight
air of sadness. Beneath this outward appearance, however, women could
sense an underlying cruelty, a criminal streak, an exciting kind of danger-
ousness. This play of contrary qualities attracted obsessive interest. The
female equivalent is the type epitomized by Marilyn Monroe; she had
the face and voice of a little girl, but something sexual and naughty em-
anated powerfully from her as well. Madame Récamier did it all with her
eyes—the gaze of an angel, suddenly interrupted by something sensual and
flirtatious.
Playing with gender roles is a kind of intriguing paradox that has a long
history in seduction. The greatest Don Juans have had a touch of prettiness
and femininity, and the most attractive courtesans have had a masculine
streak. The strategy, though, is only powerful when the underquality is
merely hinted at; if the mix is too obvious or striking it will seem bizarre or
even threatening. The great seventeenth-century French courtesan Ninon
de l'Enclos was decidedly feminine in appearance, yet everyone who met
her was struck by a touch of aggressiveness and independence in her—but
just a touch. The late nineteenth-century Italian novelist Gabriele d'An-
nunzio was certainly masculine in his approaches, but there was a gentle-
ness, a consideration, mixed in, and an interest in feminine finery The
combinations can be juggled every which way: Oscar Wilde was quite
feminine in appearance and manner, but the underlying suggestion that he
was actually quite masculine drew both men and women to him.
A potent variation on this theme is the blending of physical heat and
emotional coldness. Dandies like Beau Brummel and Andy Warhol com-
bine striking physical appearances with a kind of coldness of manner, a dis-
tance from everything and everyone. They are both enticing and elusive,
and people spend lifetimes chasing after such men, trying to shatter their
unattainability. (The power of apparently unattainable people is devilishly
seductive; we want to be the one to break them down.) They also wrap
themselves in ambiguity and mystery, either talking very little or talking
only of surface matters, hinting at a depth of character you can never reach.
When Marlene Dietrich entered a room, or arrived at a party, all eyes in-
evitably turned to her. First there were her startling clothes, chosen to make
heads turn. Then there was her air of nonchalant indifference. Men, and
women too, became obsessed with her, thinking of her long after other
memories of the evening had faded. Remember: that first impression, thatwords; he examined her
sigh minutely, her farewell,
he whole behavior. . . But
since he was uncertain of
her motive—whether she
had acted from enmity or
love—he wavered in
perplexity. He wavered
in his thoughts now here,
now there. At one moment
he was off in one direction,
then suddenly in another,
till he had so ensnared
himself in the toils of his
own desire that he was
powerless to escape . . . •
His entanglement had
placed him in a quandary,
for he did not know
whether she wished him
well or ill; he could not
make out whether she
loved or hated him. No
hope or despair did he
consider which did not
forbid him either to advance
or retreat—hope and
despair led him to and fro
in unresolved dissension.
Hope spoke to him of love,
despair of hatred. Because
of this discord he could
yield his firm belief neither
to hatred nor yet to love.
Thus his feelings drifted in
an unsure haven—hope
bore him on, despair away.
He found no constancy in
either; they agreed neither
one way or another. When
despair came and told him
that his Blancheflor was
his enemy he faltered and
sought to escape: but at
once came hope, bringing
him her love, and a fond
aspiration, and so perforce
he remained. In the face of
such discord he did not
know where to turn: no-
where could he go forward.
The more he strove to flee,
the more firmly love forced
him back. The harder he
struggled to escape, love
drew him back more firmly.
—GOTTFRIED VON STRASSBURG,
TRISTAN, TRANSLATED BY A.T.
HATTO
