436 • Appendix A: Seductive Environment/Seductive Time
sans ruled. This was what the young man was daydreaming about. Biding
his time, he managed to find an evening when he could slip out unnoticed.
He headed straight for the pleasure quarters.
This was a cluster of buildings—restaurants, exclusive clubs, tea-
houses—that stood out from the rest of the city by their magnificence and
color. The moment the young man stepped into it, he knew he was in
a different world. Actors wandered the streets in elaborately dyed kimonos.
They had such manners and attitudes, as if they were still on stage. The
streets bustled with energy; the pace was fast. Bright lanterns stood out
against the night, as did the colorful posters for the nearby kabuki theater.
The women had a completely different air about them. They stared at him
brazenly, acting with the freedom of a man. He caught sight of an onnagata,
one of the men who played female roles in the theater—a man more beau-
tiful than most women he had seen and whom the passersby treated like
royalty.
The young man saw other young men like himself entering a teahouse,
so he followed them in. Here the highest class of courtesans, the great
tayus, plied their trade. A few minutes after the young man sat down, he
heard a noise and bustle, and down the stairs came a few of the tayus, fol-
lowed by musicians and jesters. The women's eyebrows were shaved, re-
placed by a thick black painted line. Their hair was swept up in a perfect
fold, and he had never seen such beautiful kimonos. The tayus seemed to
float across the floor, using different kinds of steps (suggestive, creeping,
cautious, etc.), depending on whom they were approaching and what they
wanted to communicate to him. They ignored the young man; he had no
idea how to invite them over, but he noticed that some of the older men
had a way of bantering with them that was a language all its own. The
wine began to flow, music was played, and finally some lower-level courte-
sans came in. By then the young man's tongue was loosened. These courtesans
were much friendlier and the young man began to lose all track of time.
Later he managed to stagger home, and only the next morning did he real-
ize how much money he had spent. If father ever found out . . .
Yet a few weeks later he was back. Like hundreds of such sons in Japan
whose stories filled the literature of the period, he was on the path toward
squandering his father's wealth on the "floating world."
Seduction is another world into which you initiate your victims. Like the
ukiyo, it depends on a strict separation from the day-to-day world. When
your victims are in your presence, the outside world—with its morality, its
codes, its responsibilities—is banished. Anything is allowed, particularly
anything normally repressed. The conversation is lighter and more sugges-
tive. Clothes and places have a touch of theatricality. The license exists to
act differently, to be someone else, without any heaviness or judging. It is a
kind of concentrated psychological "floating world" that you create for the
others, and it becomes addictive. When they leave you and return to their
routines, they are doubly aware of what they are missing. The moment
they crave the atmosphere you have created, the seduction is complete. As
in the floating world, money is to be wasted. Generosity and luxury go
hand in hand with a seductive environment.
2. It began in the early 1960s: people would come to Andy Warhol's New
York studio, soak up the atmosphere, and stay awhile. Then in 1963, the
artist moved into a new Manhattan space and a member of his entourage
covered some of the walls and pillars in tin foil and spray-painted a brick
wall and other things silver. A red quilted couch in the center, some five-
foot-high plastic candy bars, a turntable that glittered with tiny mirrors, and
helium-filled silver pillows that floated in the air completed the set. Now
the L-shaped space became known as The Factory, and a scene began to
develop. More and more people started showing up—why not just leave
the door open, Andy reasoned, and come what may. During the day, while
Andy would work on his paintings and films, people would gather—actors,
hustlers, drug dealers, other artists. And the elevator would keep groaning
all night as the beautiful people began to make the place their home. Here
might be Montgomery Clift, nursing a drink by himself; over there, a
beautiful young socialite chatting with a drag queen and a museum curator.
They kept pouring in, all of them young and glamorously dressed. It was
like one of those children's shows on TV, Andy once said to a friend, where
guests keep dropping in on the endless party and there's always some new
bit of entertainment. And that was indeed what it seemed like—with noth-
ing serious happening, just lots of talk and flirting and flashbulbs popping
and endless posing, as if everyone were in a film. The museum curator
would begin to giggle like a teenager and the socialite would flounce about
like a hooker.
By midnight everyone would be packed together. You could hardly
move. The band would arrive, the light show would begin, and it would all
careen in a new direction, wilder and wilder. Somehow the crowd would
disperse at some point, then in the afternoon it would all start up again
as the entourage trickled back. Hardly anyone went to The Factory just
once.
It is oppressive always to have to act the same way, playing the same boring
role that work or duty imposes on you. People yearn for a place or a mo-
ment when they can wear a mask, act differently, be someone else. That is
why we glorify actors: they have the freedom and playfulness in relation to
their own ego that we would love to have. Any environment that offers a
chance to play a different role, to be an actor, is immensely seductive. It can
be an environment that you create, like The Factory. Or a place where you
take your target. In such environments you simply cannot be defensive; the
playful atmosphere, the sense that anything is allowed (except seriousness),
dispels any kind of reactiveness. Being in such a place becomes a drug. To
re-create the effect, remember Warhol's metaphor of the children's TVAppendix A: Seductive Environment/Seductive Time • 437
