400 • The Art of Seduction
pily let him touch her hand. Then suddenly she panicked. "I'm a Catholic
and a virgin," she blurted out, "and some day I'm going to walk down the
church aisle wearing a veil—and if you think you're going to sleep with
me, you're mistaken." Totally calm and unruffled, Flynn said she had noth-
ing to fear. He simply liked being with her. She relaxed, and politely asked
him to put his hand back. Over the next few weeks she saw him almost
every day. She became his secretary. Soon she was spending weekend nights
as his house guest. He took her on skiing and boating trips. He remained
the perfect gentleman, but when he looked at her or touched her hand, she
felt overwhelmed by an exhilarating sensation, a tingling on her skin that
she compared to stepping into a cold-needle shower on a red-hot day. Soon
she was going to church less often, drifting away from the life she had
known. Although outwardly nothing had changed between them, inwardly
all semblance of resistance to him had melted away. One night, after a party,
she succumbed. She and Flynn eventually engaged in a stormy marriage
that lasted seven years.
Interpretation. The women who became involved with Errol Flynn (and
by the end of his life they numbered in the thousands) had every reason in
the world to feel suspicious of him: he was real life's closest thing to a Don
Juan. (In fact he had played the legendary seducer in a film.) He was con-
stantly surrounded by women, who knew that no involvement with him
could last. And then there were the rumors of his temper, and his love of
danger and adventure. No woman had greater reason to resist him than
Nora Eddington: when she met him he stood accused of rape; she was in-
volved with another man; she was a God-fearing Catholic. Yet she fell un-
der his spell, just like all the rest. Some seducers—D. H. Lawrence for
instance—operate mostly on the mind, creating fascination, stirring up the
need to possess them. Flynn operated on the body. His cool, nonchalant
manner infected women, lowering their resistance. This happened almost
the minute they met him, like a drug: he was at ease around women, grace-
ful and confident. They fell into this spirit, drifting along on a current he
created, leaving the world and its heaviness behind—it was only you and
him. Then—perhaps that same day, perhaps a few weeks later—there would
come a touch of his hand, a certain look, that would make them feel a tin-
gling, a vibration, a dangerously physical excitement. They would betray
that moment in their eyes, a blush, a nervous laugh, and he would swoop in
for the kill. No one moved faster than Errol Flynn.
The greatest obstacle to the physical part of the seduction is the target's
education, the degree to which he or she has been civilized and socialized.
Such education conspires to constrain the body, dull the senses, fill the
mind with doubts and worries. Flynn had the ability to return a woman to
a more natural state, in which desire, pleasure, and sex had nothing negative
attached to them. He lured women into adventure not with arguments butbowls on a table. "Please
take your meal," said
Thubuit. "That is not
what I have come to do,"
answered Satni, while the
slaves put aromatic wood
on the fire and scattered
scent about. "Do that for
which we have come here,"
Satni repeated. "First you
will make out a deed for
my maintenance," Thubuit
replied, "and you will
establish a dowry for me of
all the things and goods
which belong to you, in
writing." Satni acquiesced,
saying, "Bring me the
scribe of the school." •
When he had done what
she asked, Thubuit rose
and dressed herself in a
robe of fine linen, through
which Satni could see all
her limbs. His passion
increased, but she said, "If
it is true that you desire to
have your pleasure of me,
you will make your
children subscribe to my
deed, that they may not
seek a quarrel with my
children." Satni sent for
his children. "If it is true
that you desire to have
your pleasure of me, you
will cause your children to
be killed, that they may
not seek a quarrel with my
children." Satni consented
again: "Let any crime be
done to them which your
heart desires." "Go into
that room," said Thubuit;
and while the little corpses
were thrown out to the
stray dogs and cats, Satni
at last lay on a bed of ivory
and ebony, that his love
might be rewarded, and
Thubuit lay down at his
side. "Then," the texts
modestly say, "magic and
the god Amen did much."
• The charms of the
Divine Women must have
been irresistible, if even
"the wisest men" were
Use Physical Lures • 401
with an open, unrestrained attitude that infected their minds. Understand:
it all starts from you. When the time comes to make the seduction physical,
train yourself to let go of your own inhibitions, your doubts, your linger-
ing feelings of guilt and anxiety. Your confidence and ease will have more
power to intoxicate the victim than all the alcohol you could apply. Exhibit
a lightness of spirit—nothing bothers you, nothing daunts you, you take
nothing personally. You are inviting your targets to shed the burdens of
civilization, to follow your lead and drift. Do not talk of work, duty, mar-
riage, the past or future. Plenty of other people will do that. Instead, offer
the rare thrill of losing oneself in the moment, where the senses come dive
and the mind is left behind.
When he kissed me, it evoked a response I had never
known or imagined before, a giddying of all my senses. It
was instinctive joy, against which no warning, reasoning
monitor within me availed. It was new and irresistible and
finally overpowering. Seduction—the word implies being
led—and so gently, so tenderly.
—LINDA CHRISTIAN
Keys to Seduction
Now more than ever, our minds are in a state of constant distraction,
barraged with endless information, pulled in every direction. Many
of us recognize the problem: articles are written, studies are completed, but
they simply become more information to digest. It is almost impossible to
turn off an overactive mind; the attempt simply triggers more thoughts—
an inescapable hall of mirrors. Perhaps we turn to alcohol, to drugs, to
physical activity—anything to help us slow the mind, be more present in
the moment. Our discontent presents the crafty seducer with infinite op-
portunity. The waters around you are teeming with people seeking some
kind of release from mental overstimulation. The lure of unencumbered
physical pleasure will make them take your bait, but as you prowl the wa-
ters, understand: the only way to relax a distracted mind is to make it focus
on one thing. A hypnotist asks the patient to focus on a watch swinging
back and forth. Once the patient focuses, the mind relaxes, the senses
awaken, the body becomes prone to all kinds of novel sensations and sug-
gestions. As a seducer, you are a hypnotist, and what you are making the
target focus on is you.
Throughout the seductive process you have been filling the target's
mind. Letters, mementos, shared experiences keep you constantly present,
even when you are not there. Now, as you shift to the physical part of
the seduction, you must see your targets more often. Your attention must
become more intense. Errol Flynn was a master at this game. When heready to do anything in
their desire to abandon
themselves, even for a few
moments, to their trained
embraces.
—G. R.TABOUIS, THE PRIVATE
LIFE OF TUTANKHAMEN,
TRANSLATED BY M. R. DOBIE
CÉLIE: What is the
moment, and how do you
define it? Because I must
say in all good honesty that
I do not understand you. •
THE DUKE: A certain
disposition of the senses, as
unexpected as it is
involuntary, which a
woman can conceal, but
which, should it be
perceived or sensed by
someone who might profit
from it, puts her in the
greatest danger of being a
little more willing than she
thought she ever should or
could be.
—CRÉBILLON FILS, LE HASARD
AU COIN DU FEU, QUOTED IN
MICHEL FEHER, ED., THE
LIBERTINE READER
When, on an autumn
evening, with closed eyes, \
I breathe the warm dark
fragrance of your breast, \
Before me blissful shores
unfold, caressed \ By
dazzling fires from blue
unchanging skies. \ And
there, upon that calm and
drowsing isle, \ Grow
luscious fruits amid
fantastic trees: \ There,
men are lithe: the women
of those seas \ Amaze one
with their gaze that knows
no guile. \ Your perfume
wafts me thither like a
wind: \ I see a harbor
thronged with masts and
sails \ Still weary from the
tumult of the gales; \ And
