Send Mixed Signals • 193
entrance, is critical. To show too much desire for attention is to signal inse-
curity, and will often drive people away; play it too cold and disinterested,
on the other hand, and no one will bother coming near. The trick is
to combine the two attitudes at the same moment. It is the essence of
coquetry.
Perhaps you have a reputation for a particular quality, which im-
mediately comes to mind when people see you. You will better hold their
attention by suggesting that behind this reputation some other quality lies
lurking. No one had a darker, more sinful reputation than Lord Byron.
What drove women wild was that behind his somewhat cold and disdainful
exterior, they could sense that he was actually quite romantic, even spiri-
tual. Byron played this up with his melancholic airs and occasional kind
deed. Transfixed and confused, many women thought that they could be
the one to lead him back to goodness, to make him a faithful lover. Once a
woman entertained such a thought, she was completely under his spell. It is
not difficult to create such a seductive effect. Should you be known as emi-
nently rational, say, hint at something irrational. Johannes, the narrator in
Kierkegaard's The Seducer's Diary, first treats the young Cordelia with
businesslike politeness, as his reputation would lead her to expect. Yet she
very soon overhears him making remarks that hint at a wild, poetic streak
in his character; and she is excited and intrigued.
These principles have applications far beyond sexual seduction. To hold
the attention of a broad public, to seduce them into thinking about you,
you need to mix your signals. Display too much of one quality—even if it
is a noble one, like knowledge or efficiency—and people will feel that you
lack humanity. We are all complex and ambiguous, full of contradictory
impulses; if you show only one side, even if it is your good side, you will
wear on people's nerves. They will suspect you are a hypocrite. Mahatma
Gandhi, a saintly figure, openly confessed to feelings of anger and venge-
fulness. John F. Kennedy, the most seductive American public figure of
modern times, was a walking paradox: an East Coast aristocrat with a love
of the common man, an obviously masculine man—a war hero—with a
vulnerability you could sense underneath, an intellectual who loved popu-
lar culture. People were drawn to Kennedy like the steel filings in Wilde's
fable. A bright surface may have a decorative charm, but what draws your
eye into a painting is a depth of field, an inexpressible ambiguity, a surreal
complexity.
194 • The Art of Seduction
Symbol: The Theater Curtain. Onstage, the curtain's heavy deep-red
folds attract your eye with their hypnotic surface. But what really
fascinates and draws you in is what you think might be happen-
ing behind the curtain—the light peeking through, the
suggestion of a secret, something about to happen.
You feel the thrill of a voyeur about to
watch a performance.
Reversal
The complexity you signal to other people will only affect them prop-
erly if they have the capacity to enjoy a mystery. Some people like
things simple, and lack the patience to pursue a person who confuses them.
They prefer to be dazzled and overwhelmed. The great Belle Epoque cour-
tesan known as La Belle Otero would work a complex magic on artists and
political figures who fell for her, but in dealing with the more uncompli-
cated, sensual male she would astound them with spectacle and beauty.
When meeting a woman for the first time, Casanova might dress in the
most fantastic outfit, with jewels and brilliant colors to dazzle the eye; he
would use the target's reaction to gauge whether or not she would demand
a more complicated seduction. Some of his victims, particularly young
girls, needed no more than the glittering and spellbinding appearance,
which was really what they wanted, and the seduction would stay on that
level.
Everything depends on your target: do not bother creating depth for
people who are insensitive to it, or who may even be put off or disturbed
by it. You can recognize such types by their preference for the simpler plea-
sures in life, their lack of patience for a more nuanced story. With them,
keep it simple.
