
Disenchantment
Seduction is a kind of spell, an enchantment. When you seduce, you are
not quite your normal self; your presence is heightened, you are playing
more than one role, you are strategically concealing your tics and insecuri-
ties. You have deliberately created mystery and suspense to make the victim
experience a real-life drama. Under your spell, the seduced gets to feel
transported away from the world of work and responsibility.
You will keep this going for as long as you want or can, heightening the
tension, stirring the emotions, until the time finally comes to complete the
seduction. After that, disenchantment almost inevitably sets in. The release of
tension is followed by a letdown—of excitement, of energy—that can even
materialize as a kind of disgust directed at you by your victim, even though
what is happening is really a natural emotional course. It is as if a drug were
wearing off, allowing the target to see you as you are—and being disap-
pointed by the flaws that are inevitably there. On your side, you too have
probably tended to idealize your targets somewhat, and once your desire is
satisfied, you may see them as weak. (After all, they have given in to you.)
You too may feel disappointed. Even in the best of circumstances, you are
dealing now with the reality rather than the fantasy, and the flames will
slowly die down—unless you start up a second seduction.
You may think that if the victim is to be sacrificed, none of this mat-
ters. But sometimes your effort to break off the relationship will inadver-
tently revive the spell for the other person, causing him or her to cling to
you tenaciously. No, in either direction—sacrifice, or the integration of the
two of you into a couple—you must take disenchantment into account.
There is an art to the post-seduction as well.
Master the following tactics to avoid undesired aftereffects.
Fight against inertia. The sense that you are trying less hard is often
enough to disenchant your victims. Reflecting back on what you did dur-
ing the seduction, they will see you as manipulative: you wanted something
then, and so you worked at it, but now you are taking them for granted.
After the first seduction is over, then, show that it isn't really over—that
you want to keep proving yourself, focusing your attention on them, luring
them. That is often enough to keep them enchanted. Fight the tendency to
let things settle into comfort and routine. Stir the pot, even if that means aIn a word, woe to the
woman of too monotonous
a temperament; her
monotony satiates and
disgusts. She is always the
same statue, with her a
man is always right. She is
so good, so gentle, that she
takes away from people the
privilege of quarreling with
her, and this is often such a
great pleasure! Put in her
place a vivacious woman,
capricious, decided, to a
certain limit, however, and
things assume a different
aspect. The lover will find
in the same person the
pleasure of variety. Temper
is the salt, the quality
which prevents it front
becoming stale.
Restlessness, jealousy,
quarrels, making friends
again, spitefulness, all are
the food of love. Enchant-
ing variety? . . . Too
constant a peace is produc-
tive of a deadly ennui.
Uniformity kills love, for
as soon as the spirit of
method mingles in an affair
of the heart, the passion
disappears, languor super-
venes, weariness begins to
wear, and disgust ends the
chapter.
—NINON DE L'ENCLOS,
LIFE, LETTERS AND EPICUREAN
PHILOSOPHY OF NINON DE
L'ENCLOS
417
