The Victim Strategy
That sweltering August in the 1770s when the Présidente de Tourvel
was visiting the château of her old friend Madame de Rosemonde,
leaving her husband at home, she was expecting to be enjoying the peace
and quiet of country life more or less on her own. But she loved the simple
pleasures, and soon her daily life at the château assumed a comfortable
pattern—daily Mass, walks in the country, charitable work in the neighbor-
ing villages, card games in the evening. When Madame de Rosemonde's
nephew arrived for a visit, then, the Présidente felt uncomfortable—but
also curious.
The nephew, the Vicomte de Valmont, was the most notorious liber-
tine in Paris. He was certainly handsome, but he was not what she had ex-
pected: he seemed sad, somewhat downtrodden, and strangest of all, he
paid hardly any attention to her. The Présidente was no coquette; she
dressed simply, ignored fashions, and loved her husband. Still, she was
young and beautiful, and was used to fending off men's attentions. In the
back of her mind, she was slightly perturbed that he took so little notice of
her. Then, at Mass one day, she caught a glimpse of Valmont apparently lost
in prayer. The idea dawned on her that he was in the midst of a period of
soul-searching.
As soon as word had leaked out that Valmont was at the château, the
Présidente had received a letter from a friend warning her against this dan-
gerous man. But she thought of herself as the last woman in the world to
be vulnerable to him. Besides, he seemed on the verge of repenting his evil
past; perhaps she could help move him in that direction. What a wonderful
victory that would be for God. And so the Présidente took note of Val-
mont's comings and goings, trying to understand what was happening in
his head. It was strange, for instance, that he would often leave in the
morning to go hunting, yet would never return with any game. One day,
she decided to have her servant do a little harmless spying, and she was
amazed and delighted to learn that Valmont had not gone hunting at all; he
had visited a local village, where he had doled out money to a poor family
about to be evicted from their home. Yes, she was right, his passionate soul
was moving from sensuality to virtue. How happy that made her feel.
That evening, Valmont and the Présidente found themselves alone for
the first time, and Valmont suddenly burst out with a startling confession.
He was head-over-heels in love with the Présidente, and with a love he hadThe weak ones do have a
power over us. The clear,
forceful ones I can do
without. I am weak and
indecisive by nature myself,
and a woman who is quiet
and withdrawn and follows
the wishes of a man even
to the point of letting
herself be used has much
the greater appeal. A man
can shape and mold her as
he wishes, and becomes
fonder of her all the while.
—MURASAKI SHIKIBU,
THE TALE OF GENJI,
TRANSLATED BY EDWARD G.
SEIDENSTICKER
Hera, daughter of Cronus
and Rhea, having been
born on the island of
Samos or, some say, at
Argos, was brought up in
Arcadia by Temenus, sou
of Pelasgus. The Seasons
were her nurses. After
banishing their father
Cronus, Hera's twin
brother Zeus sought her
out at Cnossus in Crete or,
some say, on Mount
Thornax (now called
Cuckoo Mountain) in
Argolis, where he courted
her, at first unsuccessfully.
She took pity on him only
when he adopted the
287
288 • The Art of Seduction
never experienced before: her virtue, her goodness, her beauty, her kind
ways had completely overwhelmed him. His generosity to the poor that
afternoon had been for her sake—perhaps inspired by her, perhaps some-
thing more sinister: it had been to impress her. He would never have con-
fessed to this, but finding himself alone with her, he could not control his
emotions. Then he got down on his knees and begged for her to help him,
to guide him in his misery.
The Présidente was caught off guard, and began to cry. Intensely em-
barrassed, she ran from the room, and for the next few days pretended to be
ill. She did not know how to react to the letters Valmont now began to
send her, begging her to forgive him. He praised her beautiful face and her
beautiful soul, and claimed she had made him rethink his whole life. These
emotional letters produced disturbing emotions, and Tourvel prided herself
on her calmness and prudence. She knew she should insist that he leave the
château, and wrote him to that effect; he reluctantly agreed, but on one
condition—that she allow him to write to her from Paris. She consented, as
long as the letters were not offensive. When he told Madame de Rose-
monde that he was leaving, the Présidente felt a pang of guilt: his host-
ess and aunt would miss him, and he looked so pale. He was obviously
suffering.
Now the letters from Valmont began to arrive, and Tourvel soon re-
gretted allowing him this liberty. He ignored her request that he avoid the
subject of love—indeed he vowed to love her forever. He rebuked her for
her coldness and insensitivity. He explained his bad path in life—it was not
his fault, he had had no direction, had been led astray by others. Without
her help he would fall back into that world. Do not be cruel, he said, you
are the one who seduced me. I am your slave, the victim of your charms
and goodness; since you are strong, and do not feel as I do, you have noth-
ing to fear. Indeed the Présidente de Tourvel came to pity Valmont—he
seemed so weak, so out of control. How could she help him? And why was
she even thinking of him, which she now did more and more? She was a
happily married woman. No, she must at least put an end to this tiresome
correspondence. No more talk of love, she wrote, or she would not reply.
His letters stopped coming. She felt relief. Finally some peace and quiet.
One evening, however, as she was seated at the dinner table, she sud-
denly heard Valmont's voice from behind her, addressing Madame de Rose-
monde. On the spur of the moment, he said, he had decided to return for
a short visit. She felt a shiver up and down her spine, her face flushed; he
approached and sat down beside her. He looked at her, she looked away,
and soon made an excuse to leave the table and go up to her room. But she
could not completely avoid him over the next few days, and she saw that he
seemed paler than ever. He was polite, and a whole day might pass without
her seeing him, but these brief absences had a paradoxical effect: now
Tourvel realized what had happened. She missed him, she wanted to see
him. This paragon of virtue and goodness had somehow fallen in love with
an incorrigible rake. Disgusted with herself and what she had allowed todisguise of a bedraggled
cuckoo and tenderly
warmed him in her bosom.
There he at once resumed
his true shape and ravished
her, so that she was
shamed into marrying him.
—ROBERT GRAVES,
THE GREEK MYTHS
In a strategy (?) of
seduction one draws the
other into one's area of
weakness, which is also his
or her area of weakness. A
calculated weakness, an
incalculable weakness: one
challenges the other to be
taken in....• To seduce
is to appear weak. To
seduce is to render weak.
We seduce with our
weakness, never with
strong signs or powers. In
seduction we enact this
weakness, and this is what
gives seduction its strength.
• We seduce with our
death, our vulnerability,
and with the void that
haunts us. The secret is to
know how to play with
death in the absence of a
gaze or gesture, in the
absence of knowledge or
meaning. • Psychoanalysis
tells us to assume our
fragility and passivity, but
in almost religious terms,
turns them into a form of
resignation and acceptance
in order to promote a well-
tempered psychic
equilibrium. Seduction, by
contrast, plays trumph-
antty with weakness,
making a game of it, with
its own rules.
—JEAN BAUDRILLARD,
SEDUCTION, TRANSLATED BY
BRIAN SINGER
