424 • The Art of Seduction
again. To Frieda the choice was horrific. She did not care at all about her
husband, but the children were what she lived for. Even so, a few days later,
she succumbed to Lawrence's proposal. How could she resist a man who
was willing to ask for so much, to take such a gamble? If she refused she
would always wonder, for such a man only passes once through your life.
The couple left England and headed for Germany. Frieda would men-
tion sometimes how much she missed her children, but Lawrence had no
patience with her: You are free to go back to them at any moment, he
would say, but if you stay, don't look back. He took her on an arduous
mountaineering trip in the Alps. A baroness, she had never experienced
such hardship, but Lawrence was firm: if two people are in love, why should
comfort matter?
In 1914, Frieda and Lawrence were married, but over the following
years the same pattern repeated. He would scold her for her laziness, the
nostalgia for her children, her abysmal housekeeping. He would take her
on trips around the world, on very little money, never letting her settle
down, although it was her fondest wish. They fought and fought. Once in
New Mexico, in front of friends, he yelled at her, "Take that dirty cigarette
out of your mouth! And stop sticking out that fat belly of yours!" "You'd
better stop that talk or I'll tell about your things," she yelled back. (She had
learned to give him a taste of his own medicine.) They both went outside.
Their friends watched, worried it might turn violent. They disappeared from
sight only to reappear moments later, arm in arm, laughing and mooning
over one another. That was the most disconcerting thing about the Law-
rences: married for years, they often behaved like infatuated newlyweds.
Interpretation. When Lawrence first met Frieda, he could sense right away
what her weakness was: she felt trapped, in a stultifying relationship and a
pampered life. Her husband, like so many husbands, was kind, but never
paid enough attention to her. She craved drama and adventure, but was too
lazy to get it on her own. Drama and adventure were just what Lawrence
would provide. Instead of feeling trapped, she had the freedom to leave
him at any moment. Instead of ignoring her, he criticized her constantly—
at least he was paying attention, never taking her for granted. Instead of
comfort and boredom, he gave her adventure and romance. The fights he
picked with ritualistic frequency also ensured nonstop drama and the space
for a powerful reconciliation. He inspired a touch of fear in her, which
kept her off balance, never quite sure of him. As a result, the relationship
never grew stale. It kept renewing itself.
If it is integration you are after, seduction must never stop. Otherwise
boredom will creep in. And the best way to keep the process going is often
to inject intermittent drama. This can be painful—opening old wounds,
stirring up jealousy, withdrawing a little. (Do not confuse this behavior
with nagging or carping criticism—this pain is strategic, designed to break
up rigid patterns.) On the other hand it can also be pleasant: think aboutchest, your arms tight
around her neck. \ You
want peace? Give her
kisses, make love to the girl
while she's crying— \
That's the only way to
melt her angry mood.
—OVID, THE ART OF LOVE,
TRANSLATED BY PETER GREEN
Beware the Aftereffects • 425
proving yourself all over again, paying attention to nice little details, creat-
ing new temptations. In fact you should mix the two aspects, for too much
pain or pleasure will not prove seductive. You are not repeating the first se-
duction, for the target has already surrendered. You are simply supplying
little jolts, little wake-up calls that show two things: you have not stopped
trying, and they cannot take you for granted. The little jolt will stir up the
old poison, stoke the embers, bring you temporarily back to the beginning,
when your involvement had a most pleasant freshness and tension.
Remember: comfort and security are the death of seduction. A shared
journey with a little bit of hardship will do more to create a deep bond
than will expensive gifts and luxuries. The young are right to not care
about comfort in matters of love, and when you return to that sentiment, a
youthful spark will reignite.
5. In 1652, the famous French courtesan Ninon de l'Enclos met and fell in
love with the Marquis de Villarceaux. Ninon was a libertine; philosophy
and pleasure were more important to her than love. But the marquis in-
spired new sensations: he was so bold, so impetuous, that for once in her
life she let herself lose a little control. The marquis was possessive, a trait
she normally abhorred. But in him it seemed natural, almost charming: he
simply could not help himself. And so Ninon accepted his conditions:
there were to be no other men in her life. For her part she told him that she
would accept no money or gifts from him. This was to be about love, noth-
ing else.
She rented a house opposite his in Paris, and they saw each other daily.
One afternoon the marquis suddenly burst in and accused her of having
another lover. His suspicions were unfounded, his accusations absurd, and
she told him so. This did not satisfy him, and he stormed out. The next day
Ninon received news that he had fallen quite ill. She was deeply con-
cerned. As a desperate recourse, a sign of her love and submission, she de-
cided to cut off her beautiful long hair, for which she was famous, and send
it to him. The gesture worked, the marquis recovered, and they resumed
their affair still more passionately. Friends and former lovers complained of
her sudden transformation into the devoted woman, but she did not care—
she was happy.
Now Ninon suggested that they go away together. The marquis, a mar-
ried man, could not take her to his château, but a friend offered his own in
the country as a refuge for the lovers. Weeks became months, and their lit-
tle stay turned into a prolonged honeymoon. Slowly, though, Ninon had
the feeling that something was wrong: the marquis was acting more like
a husband. Although he was as passionate as before, he seemed so con-
fident, as if he had certain rights and privileges that no other man could
expect. The possessiveness that once had charmed her began to seem
oppressive. Nor did he stimulate her mind. She could get other men, and
equally handsome ones, to satisfy her physically without all that jealousy.
