
Object of Worship
Liane de Pougy was the reigning courtesan of 1890s Paris. Slender and
androgynous, she was a novelty, and the wealthiest men in Europe vied
to possess her. By late in the decade, however, she had grown tired of it all.
"What a sterile life," she wrote a friend. "Always the same routine: the Bois,
the races, fittings; and to end an insipid day: dinner!" What wearied the
courtesan most was the constant attention of her male admirers, who
sought to monopolize her physical charms.
One spring day in 1899, Liane was riding in an open carriage through
the Bois de Boulogne. As usual, men tipped their hats at her as she passed
by. But one of these admirers caught her by surprise: a young woman with
long blond hair, who gave her an intense, worshipful stare. Liane smiled at
the woman, who smiled and bowed in return.
A few days later Liane began to receive cards and flowers from a
twenty-three-year-old American named Natalie Barney, who identified
herself as the blond admirer in the Bois de Boulogne, and asked for a ren-
dezvous. Liane invited Natalie to visit, but to amuse herself she decided to
play a little joke: a friend would take her place, lounging on her bed in the
dark boudoir, while Liane would hide behind a screen. Natalie arrived at
the appointed hour. She wore the costume of a Florentine page and carried
a bouquet of flowers. Kneeling before the bed, she began to praise the
courtesan, comparing her to a Fra Angelico painting. All too soon, she
heard someone laugh—and standing up she realized the joke that had been
played on her. She blushed and made for the door. When Liane hurried
out from behind the screen, Natalie chastised her: the courtesan had the
face of an angel, but apparently not the spirit. Contrite, Liane whispered,
"Come back tomorrow morning. I'll be alone."
The young American showed up the next day, wearing the same outfit.
She was witty and spirited; Liane relaxed in her presence, and invited her to
stay for the courtesan's morning ritual—the elaborate makeup, clothes, and
jewelry she put on before heading out into the world. Watching reverently,
Natalie remarked that she worshiped beauty, and that Liane was the most
beautiful woman she had ever seen. Playing the part of the page, she fol-
lowed Liane to the carriage, opened the door for her with a bow, and ac-
companied her on her habitual ride through the Bois de Boulogne. Once
inside the park, Natalie knelt on the floor, out of sight of the passing
gentlemen who tipped their hats to Liane. She recited poems she had writ-Ah! always to be able to
freely love the one whom
one loves! To spend my life
at your feet like our last
days together. To protect
you against imaginary
satyrs so that I can be the
only one to throw you on
this bed of moss. . . .
We'll find each other again
in Lesbos, and when dusk
falls, we'll go deep in the
woods to lose the paths
leading to this century. I
want to imagine us in this
enchanted island of
immortals. I picture it as
being so beautiful. Come,
I'll describe for you those
delicate female couples, and
far from the cities and the
din, we'll forget everything
but the Ethics of Beauty.
—NATALIE BARNEY, LETTER TO
LIANE DE POUGY,QUOTED IN
JEAN CHALON, PORTRAIT OF A
SEDUCTRESS:THE WORLD OF
NATALIE BARNEY, TRANSLATED
BY CAROL BARKO
Terrible Natalie, who used
to ravage the land of love.
Formidable Natalie, feared
by husbands since no one
could resist her
seductiveness. And one
could see how women
361
