The Ideal Lover • 35
theater; he could barely wait for its performances. Along with this interest
came an increasing expenditure of money on the arts, and an involvement
in philosophy and literature. A man who had cared only for hunting and
gambling was spending less and less time with his male companions and be-
coming a great patron of the arts. Indeed he stamped a whole era with an
aesthetic style, which became known as "Louis Quinze," rivaling the style
associated with his illustrious predecessor, Louis XIV.
Lo and behold, year after year went by without Louis tiring of his mis-
tress. In fact he made her a duchess, and her power and influence extended
well beyond culture into politics. For twenty years, Madame de Pompadour
ruled both the court and the king's heart, until her untimely death, in
1764, at the age of forty-three.
Louis XV had a powerful inferiority complex. The successor to Louis XIV,
the most powerful king in French history, he had been educated and
trained for the throne—yet who could follow his predecessor's act? Eventu-
ally he gave up trying, devoting himself instead to physical pleasures, which
came to define how he was seen; the people around him knew they could
sway him by appealing to the basest parts of his character.
Madame de Pompadour, genius of seduction, understood that inside
Louis XV was a great man yearning to come out, and that his obsession
with pretty young women indicated a hunger for a more lasting kind of
beauty. Her first step was to cure his incessant bouts of boredom. It is easy
for kings to be bored—everything they want is given to them, and they sel-
dom learn to be satisfied with what they have. The Marquise de Pom-
padour dealt with this by bringing all sorts of fantasies to life, and creating
constant suspense. She had many skills and talents, and just as important,
she deployed them so artfully that he never discovered their limits. Once
she had accustomed him to more refined pleasures, she appealed to the
crushed ideals within him; in the mirror she held up to him, he saw his as-
piration to be great, a desire that, in France, inevitably included leadership
in culture. His previous series of mistresses had tickled only his sensual de-
sires. In Madame de Pompadour he found a woman who made him feel
greatness in himself. The other mistresses could easily be replaced, but he
could never find another Madame de Pompadour.
Most people believe themselves to be inwardly greater than they out-
wardly appear to the world. They are full of unrealized ideals: they could
be artists, thinkers, leaders, spiritual figures, but the world has crushed
them, denied them the chance to let their abilities flourish. This is the key
to their seduction—and to keeping them seduced over time. The Ideal
Lover knows how to conjure up this kind of magic. Appeal only to people's
physical side, as many amateur seducers do, and they will resent you for
playing upon their basest instincts. But appeal to their better selves, to a
higher standard of beauty, and they will hardly notice that they have been
seduced. Make them feel elevated, lofty, spiritual, and your power over
them will be limitless.
36 • The Art of Seduction
Love brings to light a lover's noble and hidden qualities—
his rare and exceptional traits: it is thus liable to be decep-
tive as to his normal character.
—FRIEDRICH NIETZSCHE
Keys to the Character
Each of us carries inside us an ideal, either of what we would like to be-
come, or of what we want another person to be for us. This ideal goes
back to our earliest years—to what we once felt was missing in our lives,
what others did not give to us, what we could not give to ourselves. Maybe
we were smothered in comfort, and we long for danger and rebellion. If we
want danger but it frightens us, perhaps we look for someone who seems at
home with it. Or perhaps our ideal is more elevated—we want to be more
creative, nobler, and kinder than we ever manage to be. Our ideal is some-
thing we feel is missing inside us.
Our ideal may be buried in disappointment, but it lurks underneath,
waiting to be sparked. If another person seems to have that ideal quality, or
to have the ability to bring it out in us, we fall in love. That is the response
to Ideal Lovers. Attuned to what is missing inside you, to the fantasy that
will stir you, they reflect your ideal—and you do the rest, projecting on to
them your deepest desires and yearnings. Casanova and Madame de Pom-
padour did not merely seduce their targets into a sexual affair, they made
them fall in love.
The key to following the path of the Ideal Lover is the ability to ob-
serve. Ignore your targets' words and conscious behavior; focus on the tone
of their voice, a blush here, a look there—those signs that betray what
their words won't say. Often the ideal is expressed in contradiction. King
Louis XV seemed to care only about chasing deer and young girls, but that
in fact covered up his disappointment in himself; he yearned to have his no-
bler qualities flattered.
Never has there been a better moment than now to play the Ideal
Lover. That is because we live in a world in which everything must seem
elevated and well-intentioned. Power is the most taboo topic of all: al-
though it is the reality we deal with every day in our struggles with people,
there is nothing noble, self-sacrificing, or spiritual about it. Ideal Lovers
make you feel nobler, make the sensual and sexual seem spiritual and aes-
thetic. Like all seducers, they play with power, but they disguise their ma-
nipulations behind the facade of an ideal. Few people see through them
and their seductions last longer.
Some ideals resemble Jungian archetypes—they go back a long way
in our culture, and their hold is almost unconscious. One such dream is
that of the chivalrous knight. In the courtly love tradition of the Middle
Ages, a troubadour/knight would find a lady, almost always a married one,
