234 • The Art of Seduction
person is not good enough for you; and so on. Conversely, you can choose
someone who has a built-in barrier: they are taken, they are not meant to
want you. These barriers are more subtle than the social or religious variety,
but they are barriers nevertheless, and the psychology remains the same.
People are perversely excited by what they cannot or should not have.
Create this inner conflict—there is excitement and interest, but you are
unavailable—and you will have them grasping like Tantalus for water. And
as with Don Juan and Cristeta, the more you make your targets pursue you,
the more they imagine that it is they who are the aggressors. Your seduc-
tion is perfectly disguised.
The only way to get rid of temptation is to yield to it.
—OSCAR WILDE.
Keys to Seduction
Most of the time, people struggle to maintain security and a sense of
balance in their lives. If they were always uprooting themselves in
pursuit of every new person or fantasy that passed them by, they could not
survive the daily grind. They usually win the struggle, but it does not come
easy. The world is full of temptation. They read about people who have
more than they do, about adventures others are having, about people who
have found wealth and happiness. The security that they strive for, and that
they seem to have in their lives, is actually an illusion. It covers up a con-
stant tension.
As a seducer, you can never mistake people's appearance for reality. You
know that their fight to keep order in their lives is exhausting, and that they
are gnawed by doubts and regrets. It is hard to be good and virtuous, always
having to repress the strongest desires. With that knowledge in mind, se-
duction is easier. What people want is not temptation; temptation happens
every day. What people want is to give into temptation, to yield. That is the
only way to get rid of the tension in their lives. It costs much more to resist
temptation than to surrender.
Your task, then, is to create a temptation that is stronger than the daily
variety. It has to be focused on them, aimed at them as individuals—at their
weakness. Understand: everyone has a principal weakness, from which oth-
ers stem. Find that childhood insecurity, that lack in their life, and you hold
the key to tempting them. Their weakness may be greed, vanity, boredom,
some deeply repressed desire, a hunger for forbidden fruit. They signal it in
little details that elude their conscious control: their style of clothing, an
offhand comment. Their past, and particularly their past romances, will be
littered with clues. Give them a potent temptation, tailored to their weak-
ness, and you can make the hope of pleasure that you stir in them figure
more prominently than the doubts and anxieties that accompany it.
In 1621, King Philip III of Spain desperately wanted to forge an al-had finished talking,
Masetto began to consider
what steps he ought to take
so that he could go and
stay with them. Knowing
himself to be perfectly
capable of carrying out the
duties mentioned by Nuto,
he had no worries about
losing the job on that
particular score, but he was
afraid lest he should be
turned down because of his
youth and his unusually
attractive appearance. And
so, having rejected a
number of other possible
expedients, he eventually
thought to himself: "The
convent is a long way off,
and there's nobody there
who knows me. If I can
pretend to be dumb, they'll
take me on for sure."
Clinging firmly to this
conjecture, he therefore
dressed himself in pauper's
rags and slung an ax over
his shoulder, and without
telling anyone where he
was going, he set out for
the convent. On his
arrival, he wandered into
the courtyard, where as
luck would have it he came
across the steward, and
with the aid of gestures
such as dumb people use,
he conveyed the impression
that he was begging for
something to eat, in return
for which he would attend
to any wood-chopping that
needed to be done. • The
steward gladly provided
him with something to eat,
after which he presented
him with a pile of logs that
Nuto had been unable to
chop. . . . Mow, when the
steward had discovered
what an excellent gardener
he was, he gestured to
Masetto, asking him
whether he would like to
stay there, and the latter
made signs to indicate that
he was willing to do
whatever the steward
Create Temptation • 235
liance with England by marrying his daughter to the son of the English
king, James I. James seemed open to the idea, but he stalled for time.
Spain's ambassador to the English court, a man called Gondomar, was given
the task of advancing Philip's plan. He set his sights on the king's favorite,
the Duke (former Earl) of Buckingham.
Gondomar knew the duke's main weakness: vanity. Buckingham hun-
gered for the glory and adventure that would add to his fame; he was bored
with his limited tasks, and he pouted and whined about this. The ambas-
sador first flattered him profusely—the duke was the ablest man in the
country and it was a shame he was given so little to do. Then, he began to
whisper to him of a great adventure. The duke, as Gondomar knew, was in
favor of the match with the Spanish princess, but these damned marriage
negotiations with King James were taking so long, and getting nowhere.
What if the duke were to accompany the king's son, his good friend Prince
Charles, to Spain? Of course, this would have to be done in secret, without
guards or escorts, for the English government and its ministers would never
sanction such a trip. But that would make it all the more dangerous and ro-
mantic. Once in Madrid, the prince could throw himself at Princess
Maria's feet, declare his undying love, and carry her back to England in tri-
umph. What a chivalrous deed it would be and all for love. The duke
would get all the credit and it would make his name famous for centuries.
The duke fell for the idea, and convinced Charles to go along; after
much arguing, they also convinced a reluctant King James. The trip was a
near disaster (Charles would have had to convert to Catholicism to win
Maria), and the marriage never happened, but Gondomar had done his job.
He did not bribe the duke with offers of money or power—he aimed at
the childlike part of him that never grew up. A child has little power to re-
sist. It wants everything, now, and rarely thinks of the consequences. A
child lies lurking in everyone—a pleasure that was denied them, a desire
that was repressed. Hit at that point, tempt them with the proper toy (ad-
venture, money, fun), and they will slough off their normal adult reason-
ableness. Recognize their weakness by whatever childlike behavior they
reveal in daily life—it is the tip of the iceberg.
Napoleon Bonaparte was appointed the supreme general of the French
army in 1796. His commission was to defeat the Austrian forces that had
taken over northern Italy. The obstacles were immense: Napoleon was only
twenty-six at the time; the generals below him were envious of his position
and doubtful of his abilities. His soldiers were tired, underfed, underpaid,
and grumpy. How could he motivate this group to fight the highly experi-
enced Austrian army? As he prepared to cross the Alps into Italy, Napoleon
gave a speech to his troops that may have been the turning point in his ca-
reer, and in his life: "Soldiers, you are half starved and half naked. The gov-
ernment owes you much, but can do nothing for you. Your patience, your
courage, do you honor, but give you no glory. ... I will lead you into the
most fertile plains of the world. There you will find flourishing cities,
teeming provinces. There you will reap honor, glory, and wealth." Thewanted. . . . • Now, one
day, when Masetto
happened to he taking a
rest after a spell of
strenuous work, he was
approached by two very
young nuns who were out
walking in the garden.
Since he gave them the
impression that he was
asleep, they began to stare
at him, and the bolder of
the two said to her
companion: • "If I could
be sure that you would
keep it a secret, I would
tell you about an idea that
has often crossed my mind,
and one that might well
work out to our mutual
benefit." • "Do tell me,"
replied the other. "You can
be quite certain that I
shan't talk about it to
anyone. " • The bold one
began to speak more
plainly. • "I wonder," she
said, "whether you have
ever considered what a
strict life we have to lead,
and how the only men who
ever dare set foot in this
place are the steward, who
is elderly, and this dumb
gardener of ours. Yet I have
often heard it said, by
several of the ladies who
have come to visit us, that
all other pleasures in the
world are mere trifles by
comparison with the one
experienced by a woman
when she goes with a man.
I have thus been thinking,
since I have nobody else to
hand, that I would like to
discover with the aid of this
dumb fellow whether they
are telling the truth. As it
happens, there couldn't be
a better man for the
purpose, because even if he
wanted to let the cat out of
the bag, he wouldn't be
able to. He wouldn't even
know how to explain, for
you can see for yourself
what a mentally retarded,
dim-witted hulk of a youth
