Creating Triangles
One evening in 1882, the thirty-two-year-old Prussian philosopher
Paul Rée, living in Rome at the time, visited the house of an older
woman who ran a salon for writers and artists. Rée noticed a newcomer
there, a twenty-one-year-old Russian girl named Lou von Salomé, who
had come to Rome on holiday with her mother. Rée introduced himself
and they began a conversation that lasted well into the night. Her ideas
about God and morality were like his own; she talked with such intensity,
yet at the same time her eyes seemed to flirt with him. Over the next few
days Rée and Salomé took long walks through the city. Intrigued by her
mind yet confused by the emotions she aroused, he wanted to spend more
time with her. Then, one day, she startled him with a proposition: she
knew he was a close friend of the philosopher Friedrich Nietzsche, then
also visiting Italy. The three of them, she said, should travel together—no,
actually live together, in a kind of philosophers' menage a trois. A fierce
critic of Christian morals, Rée found this idea delightful. He wrote to his
friend about Salomé, describing how desperate she was to meet him. After
a few such letters, Nietzsche hurried to Rome.
Rée had made this invitation to please Salomé, and to impress her; he
also wanted to see if Nietzsche shared his enthusiasm for the young girl's
ideas. But as soon as Nietzsche arrived, something unpleasant happened:
the great philosopher, who had always been a loner, was obviously smitten
with Salomé. Instead of the three of them sharing intellectual conversa-
tions together, Nietzsche seemed to be conspiring to get the girl alone.
When Rée caught glimpses of Nietzsche and Salomé talking without in-
cluding him, he felt shivers of jealousy. Forget about some philosophers'
menage a trois: Salomé was his, he had discovered her, and he would not
share her, even with his good friend. Somehow he had to get her alone.
Only then could he woo and win her.
Madame Salomé had planned to escort her daughter back to Russia,
but Salomé wanted to stay in Europe. Rée intervened, offering to travel
with the Salomés to Germany and introduce them to his own mother,
who, he promised, would look after the girl and act as a chaperone. (Rée
knew that his mother would be a lax guardian at best.) Madame Salomé
agreed to this proposal, but Nietzsche was harder to shake: he decided to
join them on their northward journey to Rée's home in Prussia. At one
point in the trip, Nietzsche and Salomé took a walk by themselves, andLet me tell you about a
gentleman I once knew
who, although he was of
pleasing appearance and
modest behavior, and also a
very capable warrior, was
not so outstanding as
regards any of these
qualities that there were
not to be found many who
were his equal and even
better. However, as luck
would have it, a certain
lady fell very deeply in love
with him. She saw that he
felt the same way, and as
her love grew day by day,
there not being any way for
them to speak to each
other, she revealed her
sentiments to another lady,
who she hoped would be of
service to her in this affair.
Now this lady neither in
rank nor beauty was a whit
inferior to the first; and it
came about that when she
heard the young man
(whom she had never seen)
spoken of so affectionately,
and came to realize that
the other woman, whom
she knew was extremely
discreet and intelligent,
loved him beyond words,
she straight away began to
imagine that he must be
the most handsome, the
wisest, the most discreet of
men, and, in short, the
197
198 • The Art of Seduction
when they came back, Rée had the feeling that something physical had
happened between them. His blood boiled; Salomé was slipping from his
grasp.
Finally the group split up, the mother returning to Russia, Nietzsche to
his summer place in Tautenburg, Rée and Salomé staying behind at Rée's
home. But Salomé did not stay long: she accepted an invitation of Nietz-
sche's to visit him, unchaperoned, in Tautenburg. In her absence Rée was
consumed with doubts and anger. He wanted her more than ever, and was
prepared to redouble his efforts. When she finally came back, Rée vented
his bitterness, railing against Nietzsche, criticizing his philosophy, and ques-
tioning his motives toward the girl. But Salomé took Nietzsche's side. Rée
was in despair; he felt he had lost her for good. Yet a few days later she sur-
prised him again: she had decided she wanted to live with him, and with
him alone.
At last Rée had what he had wanted, or so he thought. The couple set-
tled in Berlin, where they rented an apartment together. But now, to Rée's
dismay, the old pattern repeated. They lived together but Salomé was
courted on all sides by young men. The darling of Berlin's intellectuals,
who admired her independent spirit, her refusal to compromise, she was
constantly surrounded by a harem of men, who referred to her as "Her Ex-
cellency." Once again Rée found himself competing for her attention.
Driven to despair, he left her a few years later, and eventually committed
suicide.
In 1911, Sigmund Freud met Salomé (now known as Lou Andreas-
Salomé) at a conference in Germany. She wanted to devote herself to the
psychoanalytical movement, she said, and Freud found her enchanting, al-
though, like everyone else, he knew the story of her infamous affair with
Nietzsche (see page 46, "The Dandy"). Salomé had no background in psy-
choanalysis or in therapy of any kind, but Freud admitted her into the in-
ner circle of followers who attended his private lectures. Soon after she
joined the circle, one of Freud's most promising and brilliant students, Dr.
Victor Tausk, sixteen years younger than Salomé, fell in love with her. Sa-
lomé's relationship with Freud had been platonic, but he had grown ex-
tremely fond of her. He was depressed when she missed a lecture, and
would send her notes and flowers. Her involvement in a love affair with
Tausk made him intensely jealous, and he began to compete for her atten-
tion. Tausk had been like a son to him, but the son was threatening to steal
the father's platonic lover. Soon, however, Salomé left Tausk. Now her
friendship with Freud was stronger than ever, and so it lasted until her
death, in 1937.
Interpretation. Men did not just fall in love with Lou Andreas-Salomé;
they were overwhelmed with the desire to possess her, to wrest her away
from others, to be the proud owner of her body and spirit. They rarely saw
her alone; she always in some way surrounded herself with other men.man most worthy of her
love in all the world. So,
never having set eyes on
him, she fell in love with
him so passionately that
she set out to win him not
for her friend but for
herself And in this she
succeeded with little effort,
for indeed she was a
woman more to be wooed
than to do the wooing.
And now listen to the
splendid sequel: not long
afterward it happened that
a letter which she had
written to her lover fell into
the hands of another
woman of comparable
rank, charm, and beauty;
and since she, like most
women, was curious and
eager to learn secrets, she
opened the letter and read
it. Realizing that it was
written from the depths of
passion, in the most loving
and ardent terms, she was
at first moved with
compassion, for she knew
very well from whom the
letter came and to whom it
was addressed; then,
however, such was the
power of the words she
read, turning them over in
her mind and considering
what kind of man it must
be who had been able to
arouse such great love, she
at once began to fall in love
with him herself; and the
letter was without doubt far
more effective than if the
young man had himself
written it to her. And just
as it sometimes happens
that the poison prepared for
a prince kills the one who
tastes his food, so that poor
woman, in her greediness,
drank the love potion
prepared for another. What
more is there to say? The
affair was no secret, and
things so developed that
many other women besides,
partly to spite the others
and partly to follow their
