Enter Their Spirit • 227
Reversal
In 1897 in Berlin, the poet Rainer Maria Rilke, whose reputation would
later circle the world, met Lou Andreas-Salomé, the Russian-born writer
and beauty who was notorious for having broken Nietzsche's heart. She
was the darling of Berlin intellectuals, and although Rilke was twenty-two
and she was thirty-six, he fell head over heels in love with her. He flooded
her with love letters, which showed that he had read all her books and
knew her tastes intimately. The two became friends. Soon she was editing
his poetry, and he hung on her every word.
Salomé was flattered by Rilke's mirroring of her spirit, enchanted by
the intense attention he paid her and the spiritual communion they began
to develop. She became his lover. But she was worried about his future; it
was difficult to make a living as a poet, and she encouraged him to learn
her native language, Russian, and become a translator. He followed her ad-
vice so avidly that within months he could speak Russian. They visited
Russia together, and Rilke was overwhelmed by what he saw—the peas-
ants, the folk customs, the art, the architecture. Back in Berlin, he turned
his rooms into a kind of shrine to Russia, and started wearing Russian peas-
ant blouses and peppering his conversation with Russian phrases. Now the
charm of his mirroring soon wore off. At first Salomé had been flattered
that he shared her interests so intensely, but now she saw this as something
else: he seemed to have no real identity. He had become dependent on her
for his own self-esteem. It was all so slavish. In 1899, much to his horror,
she broke off the relationship.
The lesson is simple: your entry into a person's spirit must be a tactic, a
way to bring him or her under your spell. You cannot be simply a sponge,
soaking up the other person's moods. Mirror them for too long and they
will see through you and be repelled by you. Beneath the similarity to them
that you make them see, you must have a strong underlying sense of your
own identity. When the time comes, you will want to lead them into your
spirit; you cannot live on their turf. Never take mirroring too far, then. It is
only useful in the first phase of a seduction; at some point the dynamic
must be reversed.This desire for a double of
the other sex that resembles
us absolutely while still
being other, for a magical
creature who is ourself
while possessing the
advantage, over all our
imaginings, of an
autonomous existence. . . .
We find traces of it in even
the most banal
circumstances of love: in
the attraction linked to any
change, any disguise, as in
the importance of unison
and the repetition of self in
the other. . . . The great,
the implacable amorous
passions are all linked to
the fact that a being
imagines he sees his most
secret self spying upon him
behind the curtain of
another's eyes.
—ROBERT MUSIL, QUOTED IN
DENIS DE ROUGEMONT, LOVE
DECLARED, TRANSLATED BY
RICHARD HOWARD

