The Charismatic • 103
At first Joan told no one what she had seen; for all anyone knew, she
was a quiet farm girl. But the visions became even more intense, and so in
1429 she left Domrémy, determined to realize the mission for which God
had chosen her. Her goal was to meet Charles in the town of Chinon,
where he had established his court in exile. The obstacles were enor-
mous: Chinon was far, the journey was dangerous, and Charles, even if she
reached him, was a lazy and cowardly young man who was unlikely to cru-
sade against the English. Undaunted, she moved from village to village, ex-
plaining her mission to soldiers and asking them to escort her to Chinon.
Young girls with religious visions were a dime a dozen at the time, and
there was nothing in Joan's appearance to inspire confidence; one soldier,
however, Jean de Metz, was intrigued with her. What fascinated him was
the detail of her visions: she would liberate the besieged town of Orléans,
have the king crowned at the cathedral in Reims, lead the army to Paris;
she knew how she would be wounded, and where; the words she attributed
to Saint Michael were quite unlike the language of a farm girl; and she was
so calmly confident, she glowed with conviction. De Metz fell under her
spell. He swore allegiance and set out with her for Chinon. Soon others of-
fered assistance, too, and word reached Charles of the strange young girl on
her way to meet him.
On the 350-mile road to Chinon, accompanied only by a handful of
soldiers, through a land infested with warring bands, Joan showed neither
fear nor hesitation. The journey took several months. When she finally ar-
rived, the Dauphin decided to meet the girl who had promised to restore
him to his throne, despite the advice of his counselors; but he was bored,
and wanted amusement, and decided to play a trick on her. She was to
meet him in a hall packed with courtiers; to test her prophetic powers, he
disguised himself as one of these men, and dressed another man as the
prince. Yet when Joan arrived, to the amazement of the crowd, she walked
straight up to Charles and curtseyed: "The King of Heaven sends me to
you with the message that you shall be the lieutenant of the King of
Heaven, who is the king of France." In the talk that followed, Joan seemed
to echo Charles's most private thoughts, while once again recounting in
extraordinary detail the feats she would accomplish. Days later, this indeci-
sive, flighty man declared himself convinced and gave her his blessing to
lead a French army against the English.
Miracles and saintliness aside, Joan of Arc had certain basic qualities that
made her exceptional. Her visions were intense; she could describe them in
such detail that they had to be real. Details have that effect: they lend a
sense of reality to even the most preposterous statements. Furthermore, in a
time of great disorder, she was supremely focused, as if her strength came
from somewhere unworldly. She spoke with authority, and she predicted
things people wanted: the English would be defeated, prosperity would re-
turn. She also had a peasant's earthy common sense. She had surely heard
descriptions of Charles on the road to Chinon; once at court, she couldAmongst the surplus
population living on the
margin of society [in the
Middle Ages] there was
always a strong tendency to
take as leader a layman, or
maybe an apostate friar or
monk, who imposed
himself not simply as a
holy man but as a prophet
or even as a living god. On
the strength of inspirations
or revelations for which he
claimed divine origin this
leader would decree for his
followers a communal
mission of vast dimensions
and world-shaking
importance. The conviction
of having such a mission,
of being divinely appointed
to carry out a prodigious
task, provided the
disoriented and the
frustrated with new
bearings and new hope. It
gave them not simply a
place in the world but a
unique and resplendent
place. A fraternity of this
kind felt itself an elite, set
infinitely apart from and
above ordinary mortals,
sharing also in his
miraculous powers.
—NORMAN COHN,
THE PURSUIT OF THE
MILLENNIUM
104 • The Art of Seduction
have sensed the trick he was playing on her, and could have confidently
picked out his pampered face in the crowd. The following year, her visions
abandoned her, and her confidence as well—she made many mistakes,
leading to her capture by the English. She was indeed human.
We may no longer believe in miracles, but anything that hints at
strange, unworldly, even supernatural powers will create charisma. The psy-
chology is the same: you have visions of the future, and of the wondrous
things you can accomplish. Describe these things in great detail, with an air
of authority, and suddenly you stand out. And if your prophecy—of pros-
perity, say—is just what people want to hear, they are likely to fall under
your spell and to see later events as a confirmation of your predictions. Ex-
hibit remarkable confidence and people will think your confidence comes
from real knowledge. You will create a self-fulfilling prophecy: people's be-
lief in you will translate into actions that help realize your visions. Any hint
of success will make them see miracles, uncanny powers, the glow of
charisma.
The authentic animal. One day in 1905, the St. Petersburg salon of
Countess Ignatiev was unusually full. Politicians, society ladies, and courtiers
had all arrived early to await the remarkable guest of honor: Grigori Efi-
movich Rasputin, a forty-year-old Siberian monk who had made a name
for himself throughout Russia as a healer, perhaps a saint. When Rasputin
arrived, few could disguise their disappointment: his face was ugly, his hair
was stringy, he was gangly and awkward. They wondered why they had
come. But then Rasputin approached them one by one, wrapping his big
hands around their fingers and gazing deep into their eyes. At first his gaze
was unsettling: as he looked them up and down, he seemed to be probing
and judging them. Yet suddenly his expression would change, and kindness,
joy, and understanding would radiate from his face. Several of the ladies he
actually hugged, in a most effusive manner. This startling contrast had pro-
found effects.
The mood in the salon soon changed from disappointment to excite-
ment. Rasputin's voice was so calm and deep; his language was coarse, yet
the ideas it expressed were delightfully simple, and had the ring of great
spiritual truth. Then, just as the guests were beginning to relax with this
dirty-looking peasant, his mood suddenly changed to anger: "I know you,
I can read your souls. You are all too pampered. . . . These fine clothes and
arts of yours are useless and pernicious. Men must learn to humble them-
selves! You must be simpler, far, far simpler. Only then will God come
nearer to you." The monk's face grew animated, his pupils expanded, he
looked completely different. How impressive that angry look was, recalling
Jesus throwing the moneylenders from the temple. Now Rasputin calmed
down, returned to being gracious, but the guests already saw him as some-
one strange and remarkable. Next, in a performance he would soon repeat"How peculiar
[Rasputin's] eyes are,"
confesses a woman who
had made efforts to resist
his influence. She goes on
to say that every time she
met him she was always
amazed afresh at the power
of his glance, which it was
impossible to withstand for
any considerable time.
There was something
oppressive in this kind and
gentle, but at the same
time sly and cunning,
glance; people were helpless
under the spell of the
powerful will which could
be felt in his whole being.
However tired you might
be of this charm, and
however much you wanted
to escape it, somehow or
other you always found
yourself attracted back and
held. • A young girl who
had heard of the strange
new saint came from her
province to the capital, and
visited him in search of
edification and spiritual
instruction. She had never
seen either him or a
portrait of him before, and
met him for the first time
in his house. When he
came up to her and spoke
to her, she thought him like
one of the peasant
preachers she had often
seen in her own country
home. His gentle, monastic
gaze and the plainly parted
light brown hair around the
worthy simple face, all at
first inspired her confidence.
But when he came nearer
to her, she felt immediately
that another quite different
man, mysterious, crafty,
and corrupting, looked out
from behind the eyes that
radiated goodness and
gentleness. • He sat down
opposite her, edged quite
close up to her, and his
light blue eyes changed
color, and became deep and
