Poeticize Your Presence • 283
hard to wax poetic about a person who comes so cheaply. If, after the initial
interest, you make it clear that you cannot be taken for granted, if you stir a
bit of doubt, the target will imagine there is something special, lofty, and
unattainable about you. Your image will crystallize in the other person's
mind.
Cleopatra knew that she was really no different from any other woman,
and in fact her face was not particularly beautiful. But she knew that men
have a tendency to overvalue a woman. All that is required is to hint that
there is something different about you, to make them associate you with
something grand or poetic. She made Caesar aware of her connection to
the great kings and queens of Egypt's past; with Antony, she created the
fantasy that she was descended from Aphrodite herself. These men were ca-
vorting not just with a strong-willed woman but a kind of goddess. Such
associations might be difficult to pull off today, but people still get deep
pleasure from associating others with some kind of childhood fantasy fig-
ure. John F. Kennedy presented himself as a figure of chivalry—noble,
brave, charming. Pablo Picasso was not just a great painter with a thirst for
young girls, he was the Minotaur of Greek legend, or the devilish trickster
figure that is so seductive to women. These associations should not be made
too early; they are only powerful once the target has begun to fall under
your spell, and is vulnerable to suggestion. A man who had just met
Cleopatra would have found the Aphrodite association ludicrous. But a
person who is falling in love will believe almost anything. The trick is to as-
sociate your image with something mythic, through the clothes you wear,
the things you say, the places you go.
In Marcel Proust's novel Remembrance of Things Past, the character
Swann finds himself gradually seduced by a woman who is not really his
type. He is an aesthete, and loves the finer things in life. She is of a lower
class, less refined, even a little tasteless. What poeticizes her in his mind is a
series of exuberant moments they share together, moments that from then
on he associates with her. One of these is a concert in a salon that they at-
tend, in which he is intoxicated by a little melody in a sonata. Whenever he
thinks of her, he remembers this little phrase. Little gifts she has given him,
objects she has touched or handled, begin to assume a life of their own.
Any kind of heightened experience, artistic or spiritual, lingers in the mind
much longer than normal experience. You must find a way to share such
moments with your targets—a concert, a play, a spiritual encounter, what-
ever it takes—so that they associate something elevated with you. Shared
moments of exuberance have immense seductive pull. Also, any kind of
object can be imbued with poetic resonance and sentimental associations, as
discussed in the last chapter. The gifts you give and other objects can be-
come imbued with your presence; if they are associated with pleasant
memories, the sight of them keeps you in mind and accelerates the poeti-
cization process.
Although it is said that absence makes the heart grow fonder, an ab-
sence too early will prove deadly to the crystallization process. Like Evaattention is fixed upon a
man, it is very easy for
him to dominate her
thoughts completely. A
simple game of blowing
hot and cold, of
solicitousness and disdain,
of presence and absence is
all that is required. The
rhythm of that technique
acts upon a woman's
attention like a pneumatic
machine and ends by
emptying her of all the rest
of the world. How well our
people put it: "to suck
one's senses"! In fact: one
is absorbed—absorbed by
an object! Most "love
affairs" are reduced to this
mechanical play of the
beloved upon the lover's
attention. • The only thing
that can save a lover is a
violent shock from the
outside, a treatment which
is forced upon him. Many
think that absence and long
trips are a good cure for
lovers. Observe that these
are cures for one's
attention. Distance from
the beloved starves our
attention toward him; it
prevents anything further
from rekindling the
attention. Journeys, by
physically obliging us to
come out of ourselves and
resolve hundreds of little
problems, by uprooting us
from our habitual setting
and forcing hundreds of
unexpected objects upon us,
succeed in breaking down
the maniac's haven and
opening channels in his
sealed consciousness,
through which fresh air and
normal perspective enter.
—JOSÉ ORTEGA Y GASSET,
ON LOVE: ASPECTS OF A
SINGLE THEME, TRANSLATED BY
TOBY TALBOT
284 • The Art of Seduction
Perón, you must surround your targets with focused attention, so that in
those critical moments when they are alone, their mind is spinning with a
kind of afterglow. Do everything you can to keep the target thinking about
you. Letters, mementos, gifts, unexpected meetings—all these give you an
omnipresence. Everything must remind them of you.
Finally, if your targets should see you as elevated and poetic, there is
much to be gained by making them feel elevated and poeticized in their
turn. The French writer Chateaubriand would make a woman feel like a
goddess, she had such a powerful effect on him. He would send her poems
that she supposedly had inspired. To make Queen Victoria feel as if she
were both a seductive woman and a great leader, Benjamin Disraeli would
compare her to mythological figures and great predecessors, such as Queen
Elizabeth I. By idealizing your targets this way, you will make them idealize
you in return, since you must be equally great to be able to appreciate and
see all of their fine qualities. They will also grow addicted to the elevated
feeling you give them.
Symbol: The Halo.
Slowly, when the target is alone, he or she begins to
imagine a kind of faint glow around your head, formed by all of
the possible pleasures you might offer, the radiance of your charged
presence, your noble qualities. The Halo separates you from other
people. Do not make it disappear by becoming fa-
miliar and ordinary.
Reversal
It might seem that the reverse tactic would be to reveal everything about
yourself, to be completely honest about your faults and virtues. This kind
of sincerity was a quality Lord Byron had—he almost got a thrill out of
disclosing all of his nasty, ugly qualities, even going so far, later on in his
life, as to tell people about his incestuous involvements with his half sister.
This kind of dangerous intimacy can be immensely seductive. The target
will poeticize your vices, and your honesty about them; they will start to
see more than is there. In other words, the idealization process is unavoid-
able. The only thing that cannot be idealized is mediocrity, but there is
nothing seductive about mediocrity. There is no possible way to seduce
without creating some kind of fantasy and poeticization.Excessive familiarity can
destroy crystallization. A
charming girl of sixteen
was becoming too fond of a
handsome young man of
the same age, who used to
make a practice of passing
beneath her window every
evening at nightfall. Her
mother invited him to
spend a week with them
in the country. It was a
bold remedy, I admit,
but the girl was of a
romantic disposition, and
the young man a trifle
dull; within three days she
despised him.
—STENDHAL, LOVE,
TRANSLATED BY GILBERT AND
SUZANNE SALE
