The Star • 129
type, as Jimmy Stewart represented the quintessential middle-American,
Cary Grant the smooth aristocrat. People of your type will gravitate to
you, identify with you, share your joy or pain. The attraction must be un-
conscious, conveyed not in your words but in your pose, your attitude.
Now more than ever, people are insecure, and their identities are in flux.
Help them fix on a role to play in life and they will flock to identify with
you. Simply make your type dramatic, noticeable, and easy to imitate. The
power you have in influencing people's sense of self in this manner is insid-
ious and profound.
Remember: everyone is a public performer. People never know exactly
what you think or feel; they judge you on your appearance. You are an ac-
tor. And the most effective actors have an inner distance: like Dietrich, they
can mold their physical presence as if they perceived it from the outside.
This inner distance fascinates us. Stars are playful about themselves, always
adjusting their image, adapting it to the times. Nothing is more laughable
than an image that was fashionable ten years ago but isn't any more. Stars
must always renew their luster or face the worst possible fate: oblivion.
Symbol: The
Idol. A piece of stone carved into the
shape of a god, perhaps glittering with gold
and jewels. The eyes of the worshippers fill the stone
with life, imagining it to have real powers. Its shape allows
them to see what they want to see—a god—but it is actually
just a piece of stone. The god lives in their imaginations.
130 • The Art of Seduction
Dangers
Stars create illusions that are pleasurable to see. The danger is that people
tire of them—the illusion no longer fascinates—and turn to another
Star. Let this happen and you will find it very difficult to regain your place
in the galaxy. You must keep all eyes on you at any cost.
Do not worry about notoriety, or about slurs on your image; we are re-
markably forgiving of our Stars. After the death of President Kennedy, all
kinds of unpleasant truths came to light about him—the endless affairs, the
addiction to risk and danger. None of this diminished his appeal, and in
fact the public still considers him one of America's greatest presidents. Errol
Flynn faced many scandals, including a notorious rape case; they only en-
hanced his rakish image. Once people have recognized a Star, any kind of
publicity, even bad, simply feeds the obsession. Of course you can go too
far: people like a Star to have a transcendent beauty, and too much human
frailty will eventually disillusion them. But bad publicity is less of a danger
than disappearing for too long, or growing too distant. You cannot haunt
people's dreams if they never see you. At the same time, you cannot let the
public get too familiar with you, or let your image become predictable.
People will turn against you in an instant if you begin to bore them, for
boredom is the ultimate social evil.
Perhaps the greatest danger Stars face is the endless attention they elicit.
Obsessive attention can become disconcerting and worse. As any attractive
woman can attest, it is tiring to be gazed at all the time, and the effect can
be destructive, as is shown by the story of Marilyn Monroe. The solution is
to develop the kind of distance from yourself that Dietrich had—take the
attention and idolatry with a grain of salt, and maintain a certain detach-
ment from them. Approach your own image playfully. Most important,
never become obsessed with the obsessive quality of people's interest in you.
