The Ideal Lover • 39
only made Talleyrand more powerful. The key to Talleyrand's power was
his ability to fathom Napoleon's secret ideal: his desire to be an emperor, a
dictator. Talleyrand simply held up a mirror to Napoleon and let him
glimpse that possibility. People are always vulnerable to insinuations like
this, which stroke their vanity, almost everyone's weak spot. Hint at some-
thing for them to aspire to, reveal your faith in some untapped potential
you see in them, and you will soon have them eating out of your hand.
If Ideal Lovers are masters at seducing people by appealing to their
higher selves, to something lost from their childhood, politicians can bene-
fit by applying this skill on a mass scale, to an entire electorate. This was
what John F. Kennedy quite deliberately did with the American public,
most obviously in creating the "Camelot" aura around himself. The word
"Camelot" was applied to his presidency only after his death, but the ro-
mance he consciously projected through his youth and good looks was fully
functioning during his lifetime. More subtly, he also played with America's
images of its own greatness and lost ideals. Many Americans felt that with
the wealth and comfort of the late 1950s had come great losses; ease and
conformity had buried the country's pioneer spirit. Kennedy appealed to
those lost ideals through the imagery of the New Frontier, which was ex-
emplified by the space race. The American instinct for adventure could
find outlets here, even if most of them were symbolic. And there were
other calls for public service, such as the creation of the Peace Corps.
Through appeals like these, Kennedy resparked the uniting sense of mission
that had gone missing in America during the years since World War II. He
also attracted to himself a more emotional response than presidents com-
monly got. People literally fell in love with him and the image.
Politicians can gain seductive power by digging into a country's past,
bringing images and ideals that have been abandoned or repressed back to
the surface. They only need the symbol; they do not really have to worry
about re-creating the reality behind it. The good feelings they stir up are
enough to ensure a positive response.
Symbol: The
Portrait Painter. Under his eye, all of
your physical imperfections disappear. He brings
out noble qualities in you, frames you in a myth, makes
you godlike, immortalizes you. For his ability to create
such fantasies, he is rewarded with great power.
40 • The Art of Seduction
Dangers
The main dangers in the role of the Ideal Lover are the consequences
that arise if you let reality creep in. You are creating a fantasy that in-
volves an idealization of your own character. And this is a precarious task,
for you are human, and imperfect. If your faults are ugly enough, or intru-
sive enough, they will burst the bubble you have blown, and your target
will revile you. Whenever Tullia d'Aragona was caught acting like a com-
mon prostitute (when, for instance, she was caught having an affair just for
money), she would have to leave town and establish herself elsewhere. The
fantasy of her as a spiritual figure was broken. Casanova too faced this dan-
ger, but was usually able to surmount it by finding a clever way to break off
the relationship before the woman realized that he was not what she had
imagined: he would find some excuse to leave town, or, better still, he
would choose a victim who was herself leaving town soon, and whose
awareness that the affair would be short-lived would make her idealizing of
him all the more intense. Reality and long intimate exposure have a way of
dulling a person's perfection. The nineteenth-century poet Alfred de Mus-
set was seduced by the writer George Sand, whose larger-than-life charac-
ter appealed to his romantic nature. But when the couple visited Venice
together, and Sand came down with dysentery, she was suddenly no longer
an idealized figure but a woman with an unappealing physical problem. De
Musset himself showed a whiny, babyish side on this trip, and the lovers
separated. Once apart, however, they were able to idealize each other again,
and reunited a few months later. When reality intrudes, distance is often a
solution.
In politics the dangers are similar. Years after Kennedy's death, a string
of revelations (his incessant sexual affairs, his excessively dangerous
brinkmanship style of diplomacy, etc.) belied the myth he had created. His
image has survived this tarnishing; poll after poll shows that he is still
revered. Kennedy is a special case, perhaps, in that his assassination made
him a martyr, reinforcing the process of idealization that he had already set
in motion. But he is not the only example of an Ideal Lover whose attrac-
tion survives unpleasant revelations; these figures unleash such powerful
fantasies, and there is such a hunger for the myths and ideals they have to
sell, that they are often quickly forgiven. Still, it is always wise to be pru-
dent, and to keep people from glimpsing the less-than-ideal side of your
character.
