290 • The Art of Seduction
Keys to Seduction
We all have weaknesses, vulnerabilities, frailnesses in our mental
makeup. Perhaps we are shy or oversensitive, or need attention—
whatever the weakness is, it is something we cannot control. We may try to
compensate for it, or to hide it, but this is often a mistake: people sense
something inauthentic or unnatural. Remember: what is natural to your
character is inherently seductive. A person's vulnerability, what they seem
to be unable to control, is often what is most seductive about them. People
who display no weaknesses, on the other hand, often elicit envy, fear, and
anger—we want to sabotage them just to bring them down.
Do not struggle against your vulnerabilities, or try to repress them, but
put them into play. Learn to transform them into power. The game is sub-
tle: if you wallow in your weakness, overplay your hand, you will be seen as
angling for sympathy, or, worse, as pathetic. No, what works best is to allow
people an occasional glimpse into the soft, frail side of your character, and
usually only after they have known you for a while. That glimpse will hu-
manize you, lowering their suspicions, and preparing the ground for a
deeper attachment. Normally strong and in control, at moments you let go,
give in to your weakness, let them see it.
Valmont used his weakness this way. He had lost his innocence long
ago, and yet, somewhere inside, he regretted it. He was vulnerable to
someone truly innocent. His seduction of the Présidente was successful be-
cause it was not totally an act; there was a genuine weakness on his part,
which even allowed him to cry at times. He let the Présidente see this side
to him at key moments, in order to disarm her. Like Valmont, you can be
acting and sincere at the same time. Suppose you are genuinely shy—at cer-
tain moments, give your shyness a little weight, lay it on a little thick. It
should be easy for you to embellish a quality you already have.
After Lord Byron published his first major poem, in 1812, he became
an instant celebrity. Beyond being a talented writer, he was so handsome,
even pretty, and he was as brooding and enigmatic as the characters he
wrote about. Women went wild over Lord Byron. He had an infamous
"underlook," slightly lowering his head and glancing upward at a woman,
making her tremble. But Byron had other qualities: when you first met
him, you could not help noticing his fidgety movements, his ill-fitting
clothes, his strange shyness, and his noticeable limp. This infamous man,
who scorned all conventions and seemed so dangerous, was personally inse-
cure and vulnerable.
In Byron's poem Don Juan, the hero is less a seducer of women than a
man constantly pursued by them. The poem was autobiographical; women
wanted to take care of this somewhat fragile man, who seemed to have lit-
tle control over his emotions. More than a century later, John F. Kennedy,
as a boy, became obsessed with Byron, the man he most wanted to emulate.
He even tried to borrow Byron's "underlook." Kennedy himself was a frail
youth, with constant health problems. He was also a little pretty, and friendsearnest money. When they
are lulled to sleep, then at
the very time they believe
you are about to perish
from bashfulness, you show
them that you are so far
from it that you are quite
self-reliant. Bashfulness
makes a man lose his
masculine significance, and
therefore it is a relatively
good means for
neutralizing the sex
relation.
—SØREN KIERKEGAARD,
THE SEDUCER'S DIARY,
TRANSLATED BY HOWARD V.
HONG AND EDNA H. HONG
Yet another form of
Charity is there, which is
oft times practised towards
poor prisoners who are shut
up in dungeons and robbed
of all enjoyments with
women. On such do the
gaolers' wives and women
that have charge over them,
or chatelaines who have
prisoners of war in their
Castle, take pity and give
them share of their love out
of very charity and
mercifulness. . . . • Thus
do these gaolers' wives,
noble chatelaines and
others, treat their prisoners,
the which, captive and
unhappy though they be,
yet cease not for that to feel
the prickings of the flesh,
as much as ever they did in
their best days. . . . • To
confirm what I say, I will
instance a tale that
Captain Beaulieu,
Captain of the King's
Galleys, of whom I have
before spoke once and
again, did tell me. He was
in the service of the late
Grand Prior of France, a
member of the house of
Lorraine, who was much
attached to him. Going
one time to take his patron
on board at Malta in a
Disarm Through Strategic Weakness and Vulnerability • 291
saw something slightly feminine in him. Kennedy's weaknesses—physical
and mental, for he too was insecure, shy, and oversensitive—were exactly
what drew women to him. If Byron and Kennedy had tried to cover up
their vulnerabilities with a masculine swagger they would have had no
seductive charm. Instead, they learned how to subtly display their weak-
nesses, letting women sense this soft side to them.
There are fears and insecurities peculiar to each sex; your use of strate-
gic weakness must always take these differences into account. A woman, for
instance, may be attracted by a man's strength and self-confidence, but too
much of it can create fear, seeming unnatural, even ugly Particularly intimi-
dating is the sense that the man is cold and unfeeling. She may feel insecure
that he is only after sex, and nothing else. Male seducers long ago learned
to become more feminine—to show their emotions, and to seem interested
in their targets' lives. The medieval troubadours were the first to master this
strategy; they wrote poetry in honor of women, emoted endlessly about
their feelings, and spent hours in their ladies' boudoirs, listening to the
women's complaints and soaking up their spirit. In return for their willing-
ness to play weak, the troubadours earned the right to love.
Little has changed since then. Some of the greatest seducers in recent
history—Gabriele D' Annunzio, Duke Ellington, Errol Flynn—understood
the value of acting slavishly to a woman, like a troubadour on bended knee.
The key is to indulge your softer side while still remaining as masculine as
possible. This may include an occasional show of bashfulness, which the
philosopher Søren Kierkegaard thought an extremely seductive tactic for a
man—it gives the woman a sense of comfort, and even of superiority. Re-
member, though, to keep everything in moderation. A glimpse of shyness
is sufficient; too much of it and the target will despair, afraid that she will
end up having to do all the work.
A man's fears and insecurities often concern his sense of masculinity; he
usually will feel threatened by a woman who is too overtly manipulative,
who is too much in control. The greatest seductresses in history knew how
to cover up their manipulations by playing the little girl in need of mascu-
line protection. A famous courtesan of ancient China, Su Shou, used to
make up her face to look particularly pale and weak. She would also walk
in a way that made her seem frail. The great nineteenth-century courtesan
Cora Pearl would literally dress and act like a little girl. Marilyn Monroe
knew how to give the impression that she depended on a man's strength to
survive. In all of these instances, the women were the ones in control of
the dynamic, boosting a man's sense of masculinity in order to ultimately
enslave him. To make this most effective, a woman should seem both in
need of protection and sexually excitable, giving the man his ultimate
fantasy.
The Empress Josephine, wife of Napoleon Bonaparte, won dominance
over her husband early on through a calculated coquetry. Later on, though,
she held on to that power through her constant—and not so innocent—use
of tears. Seeing someone cry usually has an immediate effect on our emo-frigate, he was taken by the
Sicilian galleys, and carried
prisoner to the Castel-à-
mare at Palermo, where he
was shut up in an
exceeding narrow, dark and
wretched dungeon, and
very ill entreated by the
space of three months. By
good hap the Governor of
the Castle, who was a
Spaniard, had two very
fair daughters, who hearing
him complaining and
making moan, did one day
ask leave of their father to
visit him, for the honor of
the good God; and this he
did freely give them
permission to do. And
seeing the Captain was of
a surety a right gallant
gentleman, and as ready-
tongued as most, he was
able so to win them over at
this, the very first visit,
that they did gain their
father's leave for him to
quit his wretched dungeon
and to be put in a seemly
enough chamber and
receive better treatment.
Nor was this all, for they
did crave and get
permission to come and see
him freely every day and
converse with him. • And
this did fall out so well that
presently both the twain of
them were in love with
him, albeit he was not
handsome to look upon,
and they very fair ladies.
And so, without a thought
of the chance of more
rigorous imprisonment or
even death, but rather
tempted by such
opportunities, he did set
himself to the enjoyment of
the two girls with good will
and hearty appetite. And
these pleasures did continue
without any scandal, for so
fortunate was he in this
conquest of his for the space
of eight whole months, that
no scandal did ever hap all
that time, and no ill,
