362 • The Art of Seduction
ten in Liane's honor, and she told the courtesan she considered it a mission
to rescue her from the seamy career into which she had fallen.
That evening Natalie took her to the theater to see Sarah Bernhardt
play Hamlet. During the intermission, she told Liane that she identified
with Hamlet—his hunger for the sublime, his hatred of tyranny—which,
for her, was the tyranny of men over women. Over the next few days Liane
received a steady flow of flowers from Natalie, and telegrams with little po-
ems in her honor. Slowly the worshipful words and looks became more
physical, with the occasional touch, then a caress, even a kiss—and a kiss
that felt different from any in Liane's experience. One morning, with
Natalie in attendance, Liane prepared to take a bath. As she slipped out
of her nightgown, Natalie suddenly flung herself at her friend's feet, kissing
her ankles. The courtesan freed herself and hurried into the bath, only for
Natalie to throw off her clothes and join her. Within a few days, all Paris
knew that Liane de Pougy had a new lover: Natalie Barney.
Liane made no effort to disguise her new affair, publishing a novel,
Idylle Saphique, detailing every aspect of Natalie's seduction. She had never
had an affair with a woman before, and she described her involvement with
Natalie as something like a mystical experience. Even at the end of her
long life, she remembered the affair as by far her most intense.
Renée Vivien was a young Englishwoman who had come to Paris to
write poetry and flee the marriage that her father was trying to arrange for
her. Renée was obsessed with death; she also felt there was something
wrong with her, experiencing moments of intense self-loathing. In 1900,
Renée met Natalie at the theater. Something about the American's kind
eyes melted Renée's normal reserve, and she began sending poems to Na-
talie, who responded with poems of her own. They soon became friends.
Renée confessed that she had had an intense friendship with another
woman, but that it remained platonic—the thought of physical involve-
ment repulsed her. Natalie told her about the ancient Greek poet Sappho,
who celebrated love between women as the only love that is innocent and
pure. One night Renée, inspired by their discussions, invited Natalie to her
apartment, which she had transformed into a kind of chapel. The room
was filled with candles and with white lilies, the flowers she associated with
Natalie. That night the two women became lovers. They soon moved in
together, but when Renée realized that Natalie could not be faithful to her,
her love turned into hatred. She broke off the relationship, moved out, and
vowed to never see her again.
Over the next few months Natalie sent her letters and poems, and
showed up at her new home—all to no avail. Renée would have nothing to
do with her. One evening at the opera, though, Natalie sat down beside
her and gave her a poem she had written in her honor. She expressed her
regrets for the past, and also a simple request: the two women should go on
a pilgrimage to the Greek island of Lesbos, Sappho's home. Only there
could they purify themselves and their relationship. Renée could not resist.would abandon their
husbands, homes, children,
to follow this Circe of
Lesbos. • Circe's method
was to concoct magic
potions. Natalie preferred
writing poems; she always
knew how to blend the
physical and the spiritual.
—-JEAN CHALON, PORTRAIT OF
A SEDUCTRESS: THE WORLD OF
NATALIE BARNEY, TRANSLATED
BY CAROL BARKO
There once lived in the
town of Gafsa, in Barbary,
a very rich man who had
numerous children, among
them a lovely and graceful
young daughter called
Alibech. She was not
herself a Christian, but
there were many
Christians in the town,
and one day, having on
occasion heard them extol
the Christian faith and the
service of God, she asked
one of them for his opinion
on the best and easiest way
for a person to "serve
God," as they put it. He
answered her by saying
that the ones who served
God best were those who
put the greatest distance
between themselves and
earthly goods, as happened
in the case of people who
had gone to live in the
remoter parts of the
Sahara. • She said no
more about it to anyone,
but next morning, being a
very simple-natured
creature of fourteen or
thereabouts, Alibech set out
all alone, in secret, and
made her way toward the
desert, prompted by
nothing more logical than a
strong adolescent impulse.
A few days later,
exhausted from fatigue and
hunger, she arrived in the
heart of the wilderness,
Use Spiritual Lures • 363
On the island they retraced the poetess's steps, imagining they were trans-
ported back into the pagan, innocent days of ancient Greece. For Renée,
Natalie had become Sappho herself. When they finally returned to Paris,
Renée wrote her, "My blond Siren, I don't want you to become like those
who dwell on earth. ... I want you to stay yourself, for this is the way you
cast your spell over me." Their affair lasted until Renée's death, in 1909.
Interpretation. Liane de Pougy and Renée Vivien both suffered a similar
oppression: they were self-absorbed, hyperaware of themselves. The source
of this habit in Liane was men's constant attention to her body. She could
never escape their looks, which plagued her with a feeling of heavi-
ness. Renée, meanwhile, thought too much about her own problems—
her repression of her lesbianism, her mortality. She felt consumed with
self-hatred.
Natalie Barney, on the other hand, was buoyant, lighthearted, absorbed
in the world around her. Her seductions—and by the end of her life they
numbered well into the hundreds—all had a similar quality: she took the
victim outside herself, directing her attention toward beauty, poetry, the in-
nocence of Sapphic love. She invited her women to participate in a kind of
cult in which they would worship these sublimities. To heighten the cult-
like feeling, she involved them in little rituals: they would call each other by
new names, send each other poems in daily telegrams, wear costumes,
make pilgrimages to holy sites. Two things would inevitably happen: the
women would start to direct some of the worshipful feelings they were ex-
periencing toward Natalie, who seemed as lofty and beautiful as the things
she held up to be adored; and, pleasantly diverted into this spiritualized
realm, they would also lose any heaviness they had felt about their bodies,
their selves, their identities. Their repression of their sexuality would melt
away. By the time Natalie kissed or caressed them, it would feel like some-
thing innocent, pure, as if they had returned to the Garden of Eden before
the fall.
Religion is the great balm of existence because it takes us outside our-
selves, connects us to something larger. As we contemplate the object of
worship (God, nature), our burdens are lifted away. It is wonderful to feel
raised up from the earth, to experience that kind of lightness. No matter
how progressive the times, many of us feel uncomfortable with our bodies,
our animal drives. A seducer who focuses too much attention on the
physical will stir up self-consciousness, and a residue of disgust. So focus
attention on something else. Invite the other person to worship some-
thing beautiful in the world. It could be nature, a work of art, even God
(or gods—paganism never goes out of fashion); people are dying to be-
lieve in something. Add some rituals. If you can make yourself seem to
resemble the thing you are worshiping—you are natural, aesthetic, noble,
and sublime—your targets will transfer their worship to you. Religion andwhere, catching sight of a
small hut in the distance,
she stumbled toward it,
and in the doorway she
found a holy man, who
was astonished to see her in
those parts and asked her
what she was doing there.
She told him that she had
been inspired by God, and
that she was trying, not
only to serve Him, but also
to find someone who could
teach her how she should
go about it. • On
observing how young and
exceedingly pretty she was,
the good man was afraid to
take her under his wing
lest the devil should catch
him unawares. So he
praised her for her good
intentions, and having
given her a quantity of
herb roots, wild apples, and
dates to eat, and some
water to drink, he said to
her: • "My daughter, not-
very far from here there is a
holy man who is much
more capable than I of
teaching you what you
want to know. Go along to
him." And he sent her
upon her way. • When she
came to this second man,
she was told precisely the
same thing, and so she
went on until she arrived
at the cell of a young
hermit, a very devout and
kindly fellow called
Rustico, to whom she put
the same inquiry as she
had addressed to the others.
Being anxious to prove to
himself that he possessed a
will of iron, he did not,
like the others, send her
away or direct her
elsewhere, but kept her
with him in his cell, in a
corner of which, when
night descended, he
prepared a makeshift bed
out of palm leaves, upon
which he invited her to lie
down and rest. • Once he
