Disenchantment
Seduction is a kind of spell, an enchantment. When you seduce, you are
not quite your normal self; your presence is heightened, you are playing
more than one role, you are strategically concealing your tics and insecuri-
ties. You have deliberately created mystery and suspense to make the victim
experience a real-life drama. Under your spell, the seduced gets to feel
transported away from the world of work and responsibility.
You will keep this going for as long as you want or can, heightening the
tension, stirring the emotions, until the time finally comes to complete the
seduction. After that, disenchantment almost inevitably sets in. The release of
tension is followed by a letdown—of excitement, of energy—that can even
materialize as a kind of disgust directed at you by your victim, even though
what is happening is really a natural emotional course. It is as if a drug were
wearing off, allowing the target to see you as you are—and being disap-
pointed by the flaws that are inevitably there. On your side, you too have
probably tended to idealize your targets somewhat, and once your desire is
satisfied, you may see them as weak. (After all, they have given in to you.)
You too may feel disappointed. Even in the best of circumstances, you are
dealing now with the reality rather than the fantasy, and the flames will
slowly die down—unless you start up a second seduction.
You may think that if the victim is to be sacrificed, none of this mat-
ters. But sometimes your effort to break off the relationship will inadver-
tently revive the spell for the other person, causing him or her to cling to
you tenaciously. No, in either direction—sacrifice, or the integration of the
two of you into a couple—you must take disenchantment into account.
There is an art to the post-seduction as well.
Master the following tactics to avoid undesired aftereffects.
Fight against inertia. The sense that you are trying less hard is often
enough to disenchant your victims. Reflecting back on what you did dur-
ing the seduction, they will see you as manipulative: you wanted something
then, and so you worked at it, but now you are taking them for granted.
After the first seduction is over, then, show that it isn't really over—that
you want to keep proving yourself, focusing your attention on them, luring
them. That is often enough to keep them enchanted. Fight the tendency to
let things settle into comfort and routine. Stir the pot, even if that means aIn a word, woe to the
woman of too monotonous
a temperament; her
monotony satiates and
disgusts. She is always the
same statue, with her a
man is always right. She is
so good, so gentle, that she
takes away from people the
privilege of quarreling with
her, and this is often such a
great pleasure! Put in her
place a vivacious woman,
capricious, decided, to a
certain limit, however, and
things assume a different
aspect. The lover will find
in the same person the
pleasure of variety. Temper
is the salt, the quality
which prevents it front
becoming stale.
Restlessness, jealousy,
quarrels, making friends
again, spitefulness, all are
the food of love. Enchant-
ing variety? . . . Too
constant a peace is produc-
tive of a deadly ennui.
Uniformity kills love, for
as soon as the spirit of
method mingles in an affair
of the heart, the passion
disappears, languor super-
venes, weariness begins to
wear, and disgust ends the
chapter.
—NINON DE L'ENCLOS,
LIFE, LETTERS AND EPICUREAN
PHILOSOPHY OF NINON DE
L'ENCLOS
417
418 • The Art of Seduction
return to inflicting pain and pulling back. Never rely on your physical
charms; even beauty loses its appeal with repeated exposure. Only strategy
and effort will fight off inertia.
Maintain mystery. Familiarity is the death of seduction. If the target
knows everything about you, the relationship gains a level of comfort but
loses the elements of fantasy and anxiety. Without anxiety and a touch of
fear, the erotic tension is dissolved. Remember: reality is not seductive.
Keep some dark corners in your character, flout expectations, use absences
to fragment the clinging, possessive pull that allows familiarity to creep in.
Maintain some mystery or be taken for granted. You will have only yourself
to blame for what follows.
Maintain lightness. Seduction is a game, not a matter of life and death.
There will be a tendency in the "post" phase to take things more seriously
and personally, and to whine about behavior that does not please you. Fight
this as much as possible, for it will create exactly the effect you do not want.
You cannot control the other person by nagging and complaining; it will
make them defensive, exacerbating the problem. You will have more con-
trol if you maintain the proper spirit. Your playfulness, the little ruses you
employ to please and delight them, your indulgence of their faults, will
make your victims compliant and easy to handle. Never try to change your
victims; instead, induce them to follow your lead.
Avoid the slow burnout. Often, one person becomes disenchanted but
lacks the courage to make the break. Instead, he or she withdraws inside. As
an absence, this psychological step back may inadvertently reignite the
other person's desire, and a frustrating cycle begins of pursuit and retreat.
Everything unravels, slowly. Once you feel disenchanted and know it is
over, end it quickly, without apology. That would only insult the other per-
son. A quick separation is often easier to get over—it is as if you had a
problem being faithful, as opposed to your feeling that the seduced was no
longer being desirable. Once you are truly disenchanted, there is no going
back, so don't hang on out of false pity. It is more compassionate to make a
clean break. If that seems inappropriate or too ugly, then deliberately disen-
chant the victim with anti-seductive behavior.
Examples of Sacrifice and Integration
1. In the 1770s, the handsome Chevalier de Belleroche began an affair
with an older woman, the Marquise de Merteuil. He saw a lot of her, but
soon she began to pick quarrels with him. Entranced by her unpredictableAge cannot wither her, nor
custom stale \ Her infinite
variety: other women cloy \
The appetites they feed;
but she makes hungry \
Where most she satisfies.
—WILLIAM SHAKESPEARE,
ANTONY AND CLEOPATRA
Cry hurrah, and hurrah
again, for a splendid
triumph— \ The quarry I
sought has fallen into my
toils. . . . \ Why hurry,
young man? Your ship's
still in mid-passage, \ And
the harbor I seek is far
away \ Through my verses,
it's true, you may have
acquired a mistress, \ But
that's not enough. If my
art \ Caught her, my art
must keep her. To guard a
conquest's \As tricky as
making it. There was luck
in the chase, \ But this task
will call for skill. If ever I
needed support from \
Venus and Son, and
Erato—the Muse \ Erotic
by name—it's now, for my
too-ambitious project \ To
relate some techniques that
might restrain \ That fickle
young globetrotter,
Love. . . . \ To be loved
you must show yourself
lovable— \ Something
good looks alone \ Can
never achieve. You may be
handsome as Homer's
Nireus, \ Or young Hylas,
snatched by those bad \
Naiads; but all the same,
to avoid a surprise
desertion \And keep your
girl, it's best you have gifts
of mind \ In addition to
physical charms. Beauty's
fragile, the passing \ Years
diminish its substance, eat
it away. \ Violets and
bell-mouthed lilies do not
bloom for ever, \ Hard
thorns are all that's left of
the blown rose. \ So with
you, my handsome youth:
