218 • The Art of Seduction
Since people are always reading your looks, use them to transmit the insinu-
ating signals you choose.
Finally, the reason insinuation works so well is not just that it bypasses
people's natural resistance. It is also the language of pleasure. There is too
little mystery in the world; too many people say exactly what they feel or
want. We yearn for something enigmatic, for something to feed our fan-
tasies. Because of the lack of suggestion and ambiguity in daily life, the
person who uses them suddenly seems to have something alluring and full
of promise. It is a kind of titillating game—what is this person up to? What
does he or she mean? Hints, suggestions, and insinuations create a seductive
atmosphere, signaling that their victim is no longer involved in the routines
of daily life but has entered another realm.
Symbol: The Seed.
The soil is carefully prepared. The seeds are planted
months in advance. Once they are in the ground, no one
knows what hand threw them there. They are part of the
earth. Disguise your manipulations by planting seeds
that take root on their own.
Reversal
The danger in insinuation is that when you leave things ambiguous your
target may misread them. There are moments, particularly later on in a
seduction, when it is best to communicate your idea directly, particularly
once you know the target will welcome it, Casanova often played things
that way. When he could sense that a woman desired him, and needed little
preparation, he would use a direct, sincere, gushing comment to go straight
to her head like a drug and make her fall under his spell. When the rake
and writer Gabriele D'Annunzio met a woman he desired, he rarely de-
layed. Flattery flowed from his mouth and pen. He would charm with his
"sincerity" (sincerity can be feigned, and is just one stratagem among oth-
ers). This only works, however, when you sense that the target is easily
yours. If not, the defenses and suspicions you raise by direct attack will
make your seduction impossible. When in doubt, indirection is the better
route.
Enter Their Spirit
Most
people are locked in their
own worlds, making them stubborn
and hard to persuade. The way to lure
them out of their shell and set up your seduction is
to enter their spirit. Play by their rules, enjoy what they
enjoy, adapt yourself to their moods. In doing so you will
stroke their deep-rooted narcissism and lower their defenses.
Hypnotized by the mirror image you present, they will open up,
becoming vulnerable to your subtle influence. Soon you can
shift the dynamic: once you have entered their spirit you
can make them enter yours, at a point when it is
too late to turn back. Indulge your targets'
every mood and whim, giving them
nothing to react against or
resist.
