
The Romantic Ideal
One evening around 1760, at the opera in the city of Cologne, a beau-
tiful young woman sat in her box, watching the audience. Beside her
was her husband, the town burgomaster—a middle-aged man and amiable
enough, but dull. Through her opera glasses the young woman noticed a
handsome man wearing a stunning outfit. Evidently her stare was noticed,
for after the opera the man introduced himself: his name was Giovanni Gi-
acomo Casanova.
The stranger kissed the woman's hand. She was going to a ball the fol-
lowing night, she told him; would he like to come? "If I might dare to
hope, Madame," he replied, "that you will dance only with me."
The next night, after the ball, the woman could think only of Casanova.
He had seemed to anticipate her thoughts—had been so pleasant, and yet
so bold. A few days later he dined at her house, and after her husband had
retired for the evening she showed him around. In her boudoir she pointed
out a wing of the house, a chapel, just outside her window. Sure enough, as
if he had read her mind, Casanova came to the chapel the next day to at-
tend Mass, and seeing her at the theater that evening he mentioned to her
that he had noticed a door there that must lead to her bedroom. She
laughed, and pretended to be surprised. In the most innocent of tones, he
said that he would find a way to hide in the chapel the next day—and al-
most without thinking, she whispered she would visit him there after every-
one had gone to bed.
So Casanova hid in the chapel's tiny confessional, waiting all day and
evening. There were rats, and he had nothing to lie upon; yet when the
burgomaster's wife finally came, late at night, he did not complain, but qui-
etly followed her to her room. They continued their trysts for several days.
By day she could hardly wait for night: finally something to live for, an ad-
venture. She left him food, books, and candles to ease his long and tedious
stays in the chapel—it seemed wrong to use a place of worship for such a
purpose, but that only made the affair more exciting. A few days later,
however, she had to take a journey with her husband. By the time she got
back, Casanova had disappeared, as quickly and gracefully as he had come.
Some years later, in London, a young woman named Miss Pauline no-
ticed an ad in a local newspaper. A gentleman was looking for a lady lodger
to rent a part of his house. Miss Pauline came from Portugal, and was of
the nobility; she had eloped to London with a lover, but he had beenIf at first sight a girl does
not make such a deep
impression on a person that
she awakens the ideal,
then ordinarily the
actuality is not especially
desirable; but if she does,
then no matter how
experienced a person is he
usually is rather
overwhelmed.
—SØREN KIERKEGAARD, THE
SEDUCER'S DIARY, TRANSLATED
BY HOWARD V. HONG AND
EDNA H. HONG
A good lover will behave as
elegantly at dawn as at any
other time. He drags
himself out of bed with a
look of dismay on his face.
The lady urges him on:
"Come, my friend, it's
getting light. You don't
want anyone to find you
here." He gives a deep
sigh, as if to say that the
night has not been nearly
long enough and that it is
agony to leave. Once up,
he does not instantly pull
on his trousers. Instead he
comes close to the lady and
whispers whatever was left
unsaid during the night.
Even when he is dressed,
he still lingers, vaguely
pretending to be fastening
31
