366 • The Art of Seduction
them. Half of Picasso's appeal to many women was the hope that he would
immortalize them in his paintings—for Ars longa, vita brevis (Art is long, life
is short), as they used to say in Rome. Even if your love is a passing fancy,
by capturing it in a work of art you give it a seductive illusion of eternity.
The second way to use art is to make it ennoble the affair, giving your se-
duction an elevated edge. Natalie Barney took her targets to the theater, to
the opera, to museums, to places full of history and atmosphere. In such
places your souls can vibrate to the same spiritual wavelength. Of course
you should avoid works of art that are earthy or vulgar, calling attention to
your intentions. The play, movie, or book can be contemporary, even a lit-
tle raw, as long as it contains a noble message and is tied to some just cause.
Even a political movement can be spiritually uplifting. Remember to tailor
your spiritual lures to the target. If the target is earthy and cynical, pagan-
ism or art will be more productive than the occult or religious piety.
The Russian mystic Rasputin was revered for his saintliness and his
healing powers. Women in particular were fascinated with Rasputin and
would visit him in his St. Petersburg apartment for spiritual guidance. He
would talk to them of the simple goodness of the Russian peasantry, God's
forgiveness, and other lofty matters. But after a few minutes of this, he
would inject a comment or two that were of a much different nature—
something about the woman's beauty, her lips that were so inviting, the de-
sires she could inspire in a man. He would talk of different kinds of
love—love of God, love between friends, love between a man and a
woman—but mix them all up as if they were one. Then as he returned to
discussing spiritual matters, he would suddenly take the woman's hand, or
whisper into her ear. All this would have an intoxicating effect—women
would find themselves dragged into a kind of maelstrom, both spiritually
uplifted and sexually excited. Hundreds of women succumbed during
these spiritual visits, for he would also tell them that they could not repent
until they had sinned, and who better to sin with than Rasputin.
Rasputin understood the intimate connection between the sexual and
the spiritual. Spirituality, the love of God, is a sublimated version of sexual
love. The language of the religious mystics of the Middle Ages is full of
erotic images; the contemplation of God and of the sublime can offer a
kind of mental orgasm. There is no more seductive brew than the combi-
nation of the spiritual and the sexual, the high and the low. When you talk
of spiritual matters, then, let your looks and physical presence hint of sexu-
ality at the same time. Make the harmony of the universe and union with
God seem to confuse with physical harmony and the union between two
people. If you can make the endgame of your seduction appear as a spiri-
tual experience, you will heighten the physical pleasure and create a seduc-
tion with a deep and lasting effect.he conveyed the girl to one
of their beds, where he
instructed her in the art of
incarcerating that accursed
fiend. • Never having put
a single devil into Hell
before, the girl found the
first experience a little
painful, and she said to
Rustico: • "This devil
must certainly be a bad lot,
Father, and a true enemy
of God, for as well as
plaguing mankind, he even
hurts Hell when he's
driven back inside it. " •
"Daughter," said Rustico,
"it will not always be like
that." And in order to
ensure that it wouldn't,
before moving from the bed
they put him back half a
dozen times, curbing his
arrogance to such good
effect that he was positively
glad to keep still for the rest
of the day. • During the
next few days, however, the
devil's pride frequently
reared its head again, and
the girl, ever ready to obey
the call to duty and bring
him under control,
happened to develop a taste
for the sport, and began
saying to Rustico: • "I can
certainly see what those
worthy men in Gafsa
meant when they said that
serving God was so
agreeable. I don't honestly
recall ever having done
anything that gave me so
much pleasure and
satisfaction as I get from
putting the devil back in
Hell. To my way of
thinking, anyone who
devotes his energies to
anything but the service of
God is a complete
blockhead." • . . . And so,
young ladies, if you stand
in need of God's grace, see
Use Spiritual Lures • 367
Symbol: The Stars in the sky. Objects of worship for cen-
turies, and symbols of the sublime and divine. In contemplat-
ing them, we are momentarily distracted from everything
mundane and mortal. We feel lightness. Lift your tar-
gets' minds up to the stars and they will not
notice what is happening here
on earth.
Reversal
Letting your targets feel that your affection is neither temporary nor
superficial will often make them fall deeper under your spell. In some,
though, it can arouse an anxiety: the fear of commitment, of a claustro-
phobic relationship with no exits. Never let your spiritual lures seem to be
leading in that direction, then. To focus attention on the distant future may
implicitly constrict their freedom; you should be seducing them, not offer-
ing to marry them. What you want is to make them lose themselves in the
moment, experiencing the timeless depth of your feelings in the present
tense. Religious ecstasy is about intensity, not temporal extensity.
Giovanni Casanova used many spiritual lures in his seductions—the oc-
cult, anything that would inspire lofty sentiments. For the time that he was
involved with a woman, she would feel that he would do anything for her,
that he was not just using her only to abandon her. But she also knew that
when it became convenient to end the affair, he would cry, give her a mag-
nificent gift, then quietly leave. This was just what many young women
wanted—a temporary diversion from marriage or an oppressive family.
Sometimes pleasure is best when we know it is fleeting.that you learn to put the
devil back in Hell, for it is
greatly to His liking and
pleasurable to the parties
concerned, and a great deal
of good can arise and flow
in the process.
—GIOVANNI BOCCACCIO,
THE DECAMERON, TRANSLATED
BY G. H. MCWILLIAM
