The Charismatic • 109
drome: once people imagine you can save them from chaos, they will fall in
love with you, like a person who melts in the arms of his or her rescuer.
And mass love equals charisma. How else to explain the love ordinary Rus-
sians felt for a man as emotionless and unexciting as Vladimir Lenin.
The guru. According to the beliefs of the Theosophical Society, every two
thousand years or so the spirit of the World Teacher, Lord Maitreya, inhab-
its the body of a human. First there was Sri Krishna, born two thousand
years before Christ; then there was Jesus himself; and at the start of the
twentieth century another incarnation was due. One day in 1909, the
theosophist Charles Leadbeater saw a boy on an Indian beach and had an
epiphany: this fourteen-year-old lad, Jiddu Krishnamurti, would be the
World Teacher's next vehicle. Leadbeater was struck by the simplicity of
the boy, who seemed to lack the slightest trace of selfishness. The members
of the Theosophical Society agreed with his assessment and adopted this
scraggly underfed youth, whose teachers had repeatedly beaten him for stu-
pidity. They fed and clothed him and began his spiritual instruction. The
scruffy urchin turned into a devilishly handsome young man.
In 1911, the theosophists formed the Order of the Star in the East, a
group intended to prepare the way for the coming of the World Teacher.
Krishnamurti was made head of the order. He was taken to England, where
his education continued, and everywhere he went he was pampered and
revered. His air of simplicity and contentment could not help but impress.
Soon Krishnamurti began to have visions. In 1922 he declared, "I have
drunk at the fountain of Joy and eternal Beauty. I am God-intoxicated."
Over the next few years he had psychic experiences that the theosophists
interpreted as visits from the World Teacher. But Krishnamurti had actually
had a different kind of revelation: the truth of the universe came from
within. No god, no guru, no dogma could ever make one realize it. He
himself was no god or messiah, but just another man. The reverence that
he was treated with disgusted him. In 1929, much to his followers' shock,
he disbanded the Order of the Star and resigned from the Theosophical
Society.
And so Krishnamurti became a philosopher, determined to spread the
truth he had discovered: you must be simple, removing the screen of lan-
guage and past experience. Through these means anyone could attain con-
tentment of the kind that radiated from Krishnamurti. The theosophists
abandoned him but his following grew larger than ever. In California,
where he spent much of his time, the interest in him verged on cultic ado-
ration. The poet Robinson Jeffers said that whenever Krishnamurti entered
a room you could feel a brightness filling the space. The writer Aldous
Huxley met him in Los Angeles and fell under his spell. Hearing him
speak, he wrote: "It was like listening to the discourse of the Buddha—
such power, such intrinsic authority." The man radiated enlightenment.
The actor John Barrymore asked him to play the role of Buddha in a film.Tirst and foremost there
can be no prestige without
mystery, for familiarity
breeds contempt. ...In
the design, the demeanor
and the mental operations
of a leader there must
always be a "something"
which others cannot
altogether fathom, which
puzzles them, stirs them,
and rivets their
attention . . . to hold in
reserve some piece of secret
knowledge which may any
moment intervene, and the
more effectively from being
in the nature of a surprise.
The latent faith of the
masses will do the rest.
Once the leader has been
fudged capable of adding
the weight of his
personality to the known
factors of any situation, the
ensuing hope and
confidence will add
immensely to the faith
reposed in him.
—CHARLES DE GAULLE, THE
EDGE OF THE SWORD, IN DAVID
SCHOENBRUN, THE THREE
LIVES OF CHARLES DE GAULLE
110 • The Art of Seduction
(Krishnamurti politely declined.) When he visited India, hands would
reach out from the crowd to try to touch him through the open car win-
dow. People prostrated themselves before him.
Repulsed by all this adoration, Krishnamurti grew more and more de-
tached. He even talked about himself in the third person. In fact, the ability
to disengage from one's past and view the world anew was part of his phi-
losophy, yet once again the effect was the opposite of what he expected:
the affection and reverence people felt for him only grew. His followers
fought jealously for signs of his favor. Women in particular fell deeply in
love with him, although he was a lifelong celibate.
Krishnamurti had no desire to be a guru or a Charismatic, but he inadver-
tently discovered a law of human psychology that disturbed him. People do
not want to hear that your power comes from years of effort or discipline.
They prefer to think that it comes from your personality, your character,
something you were born with. They also hope that proximity to the guru
or Charismatic will make some of that power rub off on them. They did
not want to have to read Krishnamurti's books, or to spend years practicing
his lessons—they simply wanted to be near him, soak up his aura, hear him
speak, feel the light that entered the room with him. Krishnamurti advo-
cated simplicity as a way of opening up to the truth, but his own simplicity
just allowed people to see what they wanted in him, attributing powers to
him that he not only denied but ridiculed.
This is the guru effect, and it is surprisingly simple to create. The aura
you are after is not the fiery one of most Charismatics, but one of incan-
descence, enlightenment. An enlightened person has understood some-
thing that makes him or her content, and this contentment radiates outward.
That is the appearance you want: you do not need anything or anyone, you
are fulfilled. People are naturally drawn to those who emit happiness;
maybe they can catch it from you. The less obvious you are, the better: let
people conclude that you are happy, rather than hearing it from you. Let
them see it in your unhurried manner, your gentle smile, your ease and
comfort. Keep your words vague, letting people imagine what they will.
Remember: being aloof and distant only stimulates the effect. People
will fight for the slightest sign of your interest. A guru is content and
detached—a deadly Charismatic combination.
The drama saint. It began on the radio. Throughout the late 1930s and
early 1940s, Argentine women would hear the plaintive, musical voice of
Eva Duarte in one of the lavishly produced soap operas that were so popu-
lar at the time. She never made you laugh, but how often she could make
you cry—with the complaints of a betrayed lover, or the last words of
Marie Antoinette. The very thought of her voice made you shiver with
emotion. And she was pretty, with her flowing blond hair and her serious
face, which was often on the covers of the gossip magazines.Only a month after Evita's
death, the newspaper
vendors' union put forward
her name for canonization,
and although this gesture
was an isolated one and
was never taken seriously
by the Vatican, the idea of
Evita's holiness remained
with many people and was
reinforced by the
publication of devotional
literature subsidized by
the government; by the
renaming of cities, schools,
and subway stations; and
by the stamping of
medallions, the casting
of busts, and the issuing of
ceremonial stamps. The
time of the evening news
broadcast was changed from
8:30 P.M. to 8:25 P.M.,
the time when Evita had
"passed into immortality,"
and each month there were
torch-lit processions on the
twenty-sixth of the month,
the day of her death. On
the first anniversary of her
death, La Prensa printed a
story about one of its
readers seeing Evita's face
in the face of the moon,
and after this there were
many more such sightings
reported in the newspapers.
For the most part, official
publications stopped short
of claiming sainthood for
her, but their restraint was
not always convincing. . . .
In the calendar for 1953 of
the Buenos Aires
newspaper vendors, as in
other unofficial images,
she was depicted in the
traditional blue robes of the
Virgin, her hands crossed,
her sad head to one side
and surrounded by a halo.
—NICHOLAS FRASER AND
MARYSA NAYARRO. EVITA
