The Charmer • 91
Peter's regime was repressive, and the arrests and executions piled up.
He also grew more abusive toward his wife, threatening to divorce her and
marry his mistress. One drunken evening, driven to distraction by Cather-
ine's silence and his inability to provoke her, he ordered her arrest. The
news spread fast, and Orlov hurried to warn Catherine that she would be
imprisoned or executed unless she acted fast. This time Catherine did not
argue; she put on her simplest mourning gown, left her hair half undone,
followed Orlov to a waiting carriage, and rushed to the army barracks.
Here the soldiers fell to the ground, kissing the hem of her dress—they had
heard so much about her but had never seen her in person, and she seemed
to them like a statue of the Madonna come to life. They gave her an army
uniform, marveling at how beautiful she looked in men's clothes, and set
off under Orlov's command for the Winter Palace. The procession grew as
it passed through the streets of St. Petersburg. Everyone applauded Cather-
ine, everyone felt that Peter should be dethroned. Soon priests arrived to
give Catherine their blessing, making the people even more excited. And
through it all, she was silent and dignified, as if all were in the hands of fate.
When news reached Peter of this peaceful rebellion, he grew hysterical,
and agreed to abdicate that very night. Catherine became empress without
a single battle or even a single gunshot.
As a child, Catherine was intelligent and spirited. Since her mother had
wanted a daughter who was obedient rather than dazzling, and who would
therefore make a better match, the child was subjected to a constant barrage
of criticism, against which she developed a defense: she learned to seem to
defer to other people totally as a way to neutralize their aggression. If she
was patient and did not force the issue, instead of attacking her they would
fall under her spell.
When Catherine came to Russia—at the age of sixteen, without a
friend or ally in the country—she applied the skills she had learned in
dealing with her difficult mother. In the face of all the court monsters—
the imposing Empress Elizabeth, her own infantile husband, the endless
schemers and betrayers—she curtseyed, deferred, waited, and charmed. She
had long wanted to rule as empress, and knew how hopeless her husband
was. But what good would it do to seize power violently, laying a claim that
some would certainly see as illegitimate, and then have to worry endlessly
that she would be dethroned in turn? No, the moment had to be ripe, and
she had to make the people carry her into power. It was a feminine style of
revolution: by being passive and patient, Catherine suggested that she had
no interest in power. The effect was soothing—charming.
There will always be difficult people for us to face—the chronically in-
secure, the hopelessly stubborn, the hysterical complainers. Your ability to
disarm these people will prove an invaluable skill. You do have to be care-
ful, though: if you are passive they will run all over you; if assertive you will
make their monstrous qualities worse. Seduction and charm are the most
effective counterweapons. Outwardly, be gracious. Adapt to their every
92 • The Art of Seduction
mood. Enter their spirit. Inwardly, calculate and wait: your surrender is a
strategy, not a way of life. When the time comes, and it inevitably will, the
tables will turn. Their aggression will land them in trouble, and that will
put you in a position to rescue them, regaining superiority. (You could also
decide that you had had enough, and consign them to oblivion.) Your
charm has prevented them from foreseeing this or growing suspicious. A
whole revolution can be enacted without a single act of violence, simply by
waiting for the apple to ripen and fall.
Symbol: The
Mirror. Your spirit holds a mirror up
to others. When they see you they see them-
selves: their values, their tastes, even their flaws. Their
lifelong love affair with their own image is comfortable and
hypnotic; so feed it. No one ever sees what is behind the mirror.
