446 • Appendix B: Soft Seduction: How to Sell Anything to the Masses
by controlling what they look at. Use as many media as possible to create a
kind of total environment for their perceptions. Your image should be seen
not as an advertisement but as part of the atmosphere.
Some Soft Seductions
1. Andrew Jackson was a true American hero. In 1814, in the Battle of
New Orleans, he led a ragtag band of American soldiers against a superior
English army and won. He also conquered Indians in Florida. Jackson's
army loved him for his rough-hewn ways: he fed on acorns when there was
nothing else to eat, he slept on a hard bed, he drank hard cider, just like his
men. Then, after he lost or was cheated out of the presidential election of
1824 (in fact he won the popular vote, but so narrowly that the election
was thrown into the House of Representatives, which chose John Quincy
Adams, after much deal making), he retired to his farm in Tennessee, where
he lived the simple life, tilling the soil, reading the Bible, staying far from
the corruptions of Washington. Where Adams had gone to Harvard, played
billiards, drunk soda water, and relished European finery, Jackson, like
many Americans of the time, had been raised in a log cabin. He was an un-
educated man, a man of the earth.
This, at any rate, was what Americans read in their newspapers in the
months after the controversial 1824 election. Spurred on by these articles,
people in taverns and halls across the country began talking of how the war
hero Andrew Jackson had been wronged, how an insidious aristocratic elite
was conspiring to take over the country. So when Jackson declared that he
would run again against Adams in the presidential election of 1828—but
this time as the leader of a new organization, the Democratic Party—the
public was thrilled. Jackson was the first major political figure to have a
nickname, Old Hickory, and soon Hickory clubs were sprouting up in
America's towns and cities. Their meetings resembled spiritual revivals. The
hot-button issues of the day were discussed (tariffs, the abolition of slav-
ery), and club members felt certain that Jackson was on their side. It was
hard to know for sure—he was a little vague on the issues—but this elec-
tion was about something larger than issues: it was about restoring democ-
racy and restoring basic American values to the White House.
Soon the Hickory clubs were sponsoring events like town barbecues,
the planting of hickory trees, dances around a hickory pole. They orga-
nized lavish public feasts, always including large quantities of liquor. In the
cities there were parades, and these were stirring events. They often took
place at night so that urbanites would witness a procession of Jackson sup-
porters holding torches. Others would carry colorful banners with portraits
of Jackson or caricatures of Adams and slogans ridiculing his decadent
ways. And everywhere there was hickory—hickory sticks, hickory brooms,
hickory canes, hickory leaves in people's hats. Men on horseback would
Appendix B: Soft Seduction: How to Sell Anything to the Masses • 447
ride through the crowd, spurring people into "huzzahs!" for Jackson. Oth-
ers would lead the crowd in songs about Old Hickory.
The Democrats, for the first time in an election, conducted opinion
polls, finding out what the common man thought about the candidates.
These polls were published in the papers, and the overwhelming conclu-
sion was that Jackson was ahead. Yes, a new movement was sweeping the
country. It all came to a head when Jackson made a personal appearance in
New Orleans as part of a celebration commemorating the battle he had
fought so bravely there fourteen years earlier. This was unprecedented: no
presidential candidate had ever campaigned in person before, and in fact
such an appearance would have been considered improper. But Jackson
was a new kind of politician, a true man of the people. Besides, he insisted
that his purpose for the visit was patriotism, not politics. The spectacle
was unforgettable—Jackson entering New Orleans on a steamboat as the
fog lifted, cannon fire ringing out from all sides, grand speeches, endless
feasts, a kind of mass delirium taking over the city. One man said it was
"like a dream. The world has never witnessed so glorious, so wonderful a
celebration—never have gratitude and patriotism so happily united."
This time the will of the people prevailed. Jackson was elected president.
And it was not one region that brought him victory: New Englanders,
Southerners, Westerners, merchants, farmers, and workers were all infected
with the Jackson fever.
Interpretation. After the debacle of 1824, Jackson and his supporters were
determined to do things differently in 1828. America was becoming more
diverse, developing populations of immigrants, Westerners, urban laborers,
and so on. To win a mandate Jackson would have to overcome new re-
gional and class differences. One of the first and most important steps his
supporters took was to found newspapers all around the country. While he
himself seemed to have retired from public life, these papers promulgated
an image of him as the wronged war hero, the victimized man of the peo-
ple. In truth, Jackson was wealthy, as were all of his major backers. He
owned one of the largest plantations in Tennessee, and he owned many
slaves. He drank more fine liquor than hard cider and slept on a soft bed
with European linens. And while he might have been uneducated, he was
extremely shrewd, with a shrewdness built on years of army combat.
The image of the man of the earth disguised all this, and, once it was
established, it could be contrasted with the aristocratic image of Adams. In
this way Jackson's strategists covered up his political inexperience and made
the election turn on questions of character and values. Instead of politi-
cal issues they raised trivial matters like drinking habits and church atten-
dance. To keep up the enthusiasm they staged spectacles that seemed to
be spontaneous celebrations but in fact were carefully choreographed. The
support for Jackson seemed to be a movement, as evidenced (and advanced)
