Keep Them in Suspense—What Comes Next? • 245
find that he was embracing Caterina, dressed up in Mathilde's clothes.
Mathilde had befriended Caterina and learned her story. Apparently taking
pity on her, she had arranged it so that Caterina could leave the convent for
the evening, and meet up with Casanova. Only a few months before
Casanova had been in love with this girl, but he had forgotten about her.
Compared to the ingenious Mathilde, Caterina was a simpering bore. He
could not conceal his disappointment. He burned to see Mathilde.
Casanova was angry at the trick Mathilde had played. But a few days
later, when he saw her again, all was forgiven. As she had predicted during
their first interview, her power over him was complete. He had become her
slave, addicted to her whims, and to the dangerous pleasures she offered.
Who knows what rash act he might have committed on her behalf had
their affair not been cut short by circumstance.
Interpretation. Casanova was almost always in control in his seductions.
He was the one who led, taking his victim on a trip to an unknown desti-
nation, luring her into his web. In all of his memoirs the story of Mathilde
is the only seduction in which the tables are happily turned: he is the se-
duced, the bewildered victim.
What made Casanova Mathilde's slave was the same tactic he had used
on countless girls: the irresistible lure of being led by another person, the
thrill of being surprised, the power of mystery. Each time he left Mathilde
his head was spinning with questions. Her ability to go on surprising him
kept her always in his mind, deepening her spell and blotting Caterina out.
Each surprise was carefully calculated for the effect it would produce. The
first unexpected letter piqued his curiosity, as did that first sight of her in
the waiting room; suddenly seeing her dressed as an elegant woman stirred
intense desire; then seeing her dressed as a man intensified the excitingly
transgressive nature of their liaison. The surprises put him off balance, yet
left him quivering with anticipation of the next one. Even an unpleasant
surprise, such as the encounter with Caterina that Mathilde had set up, kept
him emotional and weak. Meeting the somewhat bland Caterina at that
moment only made him long that much more for Mathilde.
In seduction, you need to create constant tension and suspense, a feel-
ing that with you nothing is predictable. Do not think of this as a painful
challenge. You are creating drama in real life, so pour your creative energies
into it, have some fun. There are all kinds of calculated surprises you can
spring on your victims—sending a letter from out of the blue, showing up
unexpectedly, taking them to a place they have never been. But best of all
are surprises that reveal something new about your character. This needs to
be set up. In those first few weeks, your targets will tend to make certain
snap judgments about you, based on appearances. Perhaps they see you as
a bit shy, practical, puritanical. You know that this is not the real you, but it
is how you act in social situations. Let them, however, have these impres-
sions, and in fact accentuate them a little, without overacting: for instance,Shahzaman related to [his
brother King Shahriyar] all
that he had seen in the
king's garden that day. . . .
• Upon this Shahriyar
announced his intention to
set forth on another
expedition. The troops
went out of the city with
the tents, and King
Shahriyar followed them.
And after he had stayed a
while in the camp, he gave
orders to his slaves that no
one was to be admitted to
the king's tent. He then
disguised himself and
returned unnoticed to the
palace, where his brother
was waiting for him. They
both sat at one of the
windows overlooking the
garden; and when they had
been there a short time, the
queen and her women
appeared with the black
slaves, and behaved as
Shahzaman had
described. . . . • As soon
as they entered the palace,
King Shahriyar put his
wife to death, together with
her women and the black
slaves. Thenceforth he
made it his custom to take
a virgin in marriage to his
bed each night, and kill her
the next morning. This he
continued to do for three
years, until a clamor rose
among the people, some of
whom fled the country with
their daughters. • Now the
vizier had two daughters.
The elder was called
Shahrazad, and the
younger Dunyazad.
Shahrazad possessed many
accomplishments and was
versed in the wisdom of the
poets and the legends of
ancient kings. • That day
Shahrazad noticed her
father's anxiety and asked
him what it was that
troubled him. When the
vizier told her of his
predicament, she said:
"Give me in marriage to
246 • The Art of Seduction
seem a little more reserved than usual. Now you have room to suddenly
surprise them with some bold or poetic or naughty action. Once they have
changed their minds about you, surprise them again, as Mathilde did with
Casanova—first a nun who wants an affair, then a libertine, then a seduc-
tress with a sadistic streak. As they strain to figure you out, they will be
thinking about you all of the time, and will want to know more about you.
Their curiosity will lead them further into your web, until it is too late for
them to turn back.
This is always the law for the interesting. . . . If one just
knows how to surprise, one always wins the game. The en-
ergy of the person involved is temporarily suspended; one
makes it impossible for her to act.
—SØREN KIERKEGAARD
Keys to Seduction
Achild is usually a willful, stubborn creature who will deliberately do
the opposite of what we ask. But there is one scenario in which chil-
dren will happily give up their usual willfulness: when they are promised a
surprise. Perhaps it is a present hidden in a box, a game with an unforesee-
able ending, a journey with an unknown destination, a suspenseful story
with a surprise finish. In those moments when children are waiting for a
surprise, their willpower is suspended. They are in your thrall for as long as
you dangle possibility before them. This childish habit is buried deep
within us, and is the source of an elemental human pleasure: being led by a
person who knows where they are going, and who takes us on a journey.
(Maybe our joy in being carried along involves a buried memory of being
literally carried, by a parent, when we are small.)
We get a similar thrill when we watch a movie or read a thriller: we are
in the hands of a director or author who is leading us along, taking us
through twists and turns. We stay in our seats, we turn the pages, happily
enslaved by the suspense. It is the pleasure a woman has in being led by a
confident dancer, letting go of any defensiveness she may feel and letting
another person do the work. Falling in love involves anticipation; we are
about to head off in a new direction, enter a new life, where everything
will be strange. The seduced wants to be led, to be carried along like a
child. If you are predictable, the charm wears off; everyday life is pre-
dictable. In the Arabian Tales from the Thousand and One Nights, each night
King Shahriyar takes a virgin as his wife, then kills her the following morn-
ing. One such virgin, Shahrazad, manages to escape this fate by telling the
king a story that can only be completed the following day. She does this
night after night, keeping the king in constant suspense. When one story
finishes, she quickly starts up another. She does this for nearly three years,
until the king finally decides to spare her life. You are like Shahrazad: with-this king; either I shall die
and be a ransom for the
daughters of Moslems, or
live and be the cause of
their deliverance." He
earnestly pleaded with her
against such a hazard; but
Shahrazad was resolved,
and would not yield to her
father's entreaties. . . . •
So the vizier arrayed his
daughter in bridal garments
and decked her with jewels
and made ready to
announce Shahrazad's
wedding to the king. •
Before saying farewell to
her sister, Shahrazad gave
her these instructions:
"When I am received by
the king, I shall send for
you. Then when the king
has finished his act with
me, you must say: 'Tell
me, my sister, some tale of
marvel to beguile the
night.' Then I will tell you
a tale which, if Allah wills,
shall be the means of our
deliverance. " • The vizier
went with his daughter to
the king. And when the
king had taken the maiden
Shahrazad to his chamber
and had lain with her, she
wept and said: "I have a
young sister to whom I
wish to bid farewell." •
The king sent for
Dunyazad. When she
arrived, she threw her arms
around her sister's neck,
and seated herself by her
side. • Then Dunyazad
said to Shahrazad: "Tell
us, my sister, a tale of
marvel, so that the night
may pass pleasantly." •
"Gladly," she answered,
"if the king permits. " •
And the king, who was
troubled with sleeplessness,
eagerly listened to the tale
of Shahrazad: Once upon
the time, in the city of
Basrah, there lived a
prosperous tailor who was
fond of sport and
merriment. . . . • [Nearly
