118 • The Art of Seduction
charisma is created consciously and is kept under control. When you need
to you can glow with confidence and fervor, inspiring the masses. But
when the adventure is over, you can settle into a routine, turning the heat,
not out, but down. (Robespierre may have been planning that move, but it
came a day too late.) People will admire your self-control and adaptability.
Their love affair with you will move closer to the habitual affection of a
man and wife. You will even have the leeway to look a little boring, a little
simple—a role that can also seem charismatic, if played correctly. Remem-
ber: charisma depends on success, and the best way to maintain success, af-
ter the initial charismatic rush, is to be practical and even cautious. Mao
Zedong was a distant, enigmatic man who for many had an awe-inspiring
charisma. He suffered many setbacks that would have spelled the end of a
less clever man, but after each reversal he retreated, becoming practical, tol-
erant, flexible; at least for a while. This protected him from the dangers of a
counterreaction.
There is another alternative: to play the armed prophet. According to
Machiavelli, although a prophet may acquire power through his charismatic
personality, he cannot long survive without the strength to back it up. He
needs an army. The masses will tire of him; they will need to be forced.
Being an armed prophet may not literally involve arms, but it demands a
forceful side to your character, which you can back up with action. Unfor-
tunately this means being merciless with your enemies for as long as you re-
tain power. And no one creates more bitter enemies than the Charismatic.
Finally, there is nothing more dangerous than succeeding a Charismatic.
These characters are unconventional, and their rule is personal in style, be-
ing stamped with the wildness of their personalities. They often leave chaos
in their wake. The one who follows after a Charismatic is left with a mess,
which the people, however, do not see. They miss their inspirer and blame
the successor. Avoid this situation at all costs. If it is unavoidable, do not try
to continue what the Charismatic started; go in a new direction. By being
practical, trustworthy, and plain-speaking, you can often generate a strange
kind of charisma through contrast. That was how Harry Truman not only
survived the legacy of Roosevelt but established his own type of charisma.
Daily life is harsh, and most of us
constantly seek escape from it in fantasies and
dreams. Stars feed on this weakness; standing
out from others through a distinctive and appeal-
ing style, they make us want to watch them. At
the same time, they are vague and ethereal,
keeping their distance, and letting us imagine
more than is there. Their dreamlike quality
works on our unconscious; we are not even
aware how much we imitate them. Learn to be-
come an object of fascination by projecting the
glittering but elusive presence of the Star.
