246 • The Art of Seduction
seem a little more reserved than usual. Now you have room to suddenly
surprise them with some bold or poetic or naughty action. Once they have
changed their minds about you, surprise them again, as Mathilde did with
Casanova—first a nun who wants an affair, then a libertine, then a seduc-
tress with a sadistic streak. As they strain to figure you out, they will be
thinking about you all of the time, and will want to know more about you.
Their curiosity will lead them further into your web, until it is too late for
them to turn back.
This is always the law for the interesting. . . . If one just
knows how to surprise, one always wins the game. The en-
ergy of the person involved is temporarily suspended; one
makes it impossible for her to act.
—SØREN KIERKEGAARD
Keys to Seduction
Achild is usually a willful, stubborn creature who will deliberately do
the opposite of what we ask. But there is one scenario in which chil-
dren will happily give up their usual willfulness: when they are promised a
surprise. Perhaps it is a present hidden in a box, a game with an unforesee-
able ending, a journey with an unknown destination, a suspenseful story
with a surprise finish. In those moments when children are waiting for a
surprise, their willpower is suspended. They are in your thrall for as long as
you dangle possibility before them. This childish habit is buried deep
within us, and is the source of an elemental human pleasure: being led by a
person who knows where they are going, and who takes us on a journey.
(Maybe our joy in being carried along involves a buried memory of being
literally carried, by a parent, when we are small.)
We get a similar thrill when we watch a movie or read a thriller: we are
in the hands of a director or author who is leading us along, taking us
through twists and turns. We stay in our seats, we turn the pages, happily
enslaved by the suspense. It is the pleasure a woman has in being led by a
confident dancer, letting go of any defensiveness she may feel and letting
another person do the work. Falling in love involves anticipation; we are
about to head off in a new direction, enter a new life, where everything
will be strange. The seduced wants to be led, to be carried along like a
child. If you are predictable, the charm wears off; everyday life is pre-
dictable. In the Arabian Tales from the Thousand and One Nights, each night
King Shahriyar takes a virgin as his wife, then kills her the following morn-
ing. One such virgin, Shahrazad, manages to escape this fate by telling the
king a story that can only be completed the following day. She does this
night after night, keeping the king in constant suspense. When one story
finishes, she quickly starts up another. She does this for nearly three years,
until the king finally decides to spare her life. You are like Shahrazad: with-this king; either I shall die
and be a ransom for the
daughters of Moslems, or
live and be the cause of
their deliverance." He
earnestly pleaded with her
against such a hazard; but
Shahrazad was resolved,
and would not yield to her
father's entreaties. . . . •
So the vizier arrayed his
daughter in bridal garments
and decked her with jewels
and made ready to
announce Shahrazad's
wedding to the king. •
Before saying farewell to
her sister, Shahrazad gave
her these instructions:
"When I am received by
the king, I shall send for
you. Then when the king
has finished his act with
me, you must say: 'Tell
me, my sister, some tale of
marvel to beguile the
night.' Then I will tell you
a tale which, if Allah wills,
shall be the means of our
deliverance. " • The vizier
went with his daughter to
the king. And when the
king had taken the maiden
Shahrazad to his chamber
and had lain with her, she
wept and said: "I have a
young sister to whom I
wish to bid farewell." •
The king sent for
Dunyazad. When she
arrived, she threw her arms
around her sister's neck,
and seated herself by her
side. • Then Dunyazad
said to Shahrazad: "Tell
us, my sister, a tale of
marvel, so that the night
may pass pleasantly." •
"Gladly," she answered,
"if the king permits. " •
And the king, who was
troubled with sleeplessness,
eagerly listened to the tale
of Shahrazad: Once upon
the time, in the city of
Basrah, there lived a
prosperous tailor who was
fond of sport and
merriment. . . . • [Nearly
Keep Them in Suspense—What Comes Next? • 247
out new stories, without a feeling of anticipation, your seduction will die.
Keep stoking the fires night after night. Your targets must never know
what's coming next—what surprises you have in store for them. As with
King Shahriyar, they will be under your control for as long as you can keep
them guessing.
In 1765, Casanova met a young Italian countess named Clementina
who lived with her two sisters in a château. Clementina loved to read, and
had little interest in the men who swarmed around her. Casanova added
himself to their number, buying her books, engaging her in literary discus-
sions, but she was no less indifferent to him than she had been to them.
Then one day he invited the entire family on a little trip. He would not tell
them where they were going. They piled into the carriage, all the way try-
ing to guess their destination. A few hours later they entered Milan—what
joy, the sisters had never been there. Casanova led them to his apartment,
where three dresses had been laid out—the most magnificent dresses the
girls had ever seen. There was one for each of the sisters, he told them, and
the green one was for Clementina. Stunned, she put it on, and her face lit
up. The surprises did not stop—there was a delicious meal, champagne,
games. By the time they returned to the château, late in the evening,
Clementina had fallen hopelessly in love with Casanova.
The reason was simple: surprise creates a moment when people's de-
fenses come down and new emotions can rush in. If the surprise is pleasur-
able, the seductive poison enters their veins without their realizing it. Any
sudden event has a similar effect, striking directly at our emotions before
we get defensive. Rakes know this power well.
A young married woman in the court of Louis XV, in eighteenth-
century France, noticed a handsome young courtier watching her, first at
the opera, then in church. Making inquiries, she found it was the Duc de
Richelieu, the most notorious rake in France. No woman was safe from
this man, she was warned; he was impossible to resist, and she should avoid
him at all costs. Nonsense, she replied, she was happily married. He could
not possibly seduce her. Seeing him again, she laughed at his persistence.
He would disguise himself as a beggar and approach her in the park, or his
coach would suddenly come alongside hers. He was never aggressive, and
seemed harmless enough. She let him talk to her at court; he was charming
and witty, and even asked to meet her husband.
The weeks passed, and the woman realized she had made a mistake: she
looked forward to seeing the marquis. She had let down her guard. This
had to stop. Now she started avoiding him, and he seemed to respect her
feelings: he stopped bothering her. Then one day, weeks later, she was at
the country manor of a friend when the marquis suddenly appeared. She
blushed, trembled, walked away, but his unexpected appearance had caught
her unawares—it had pushed her over the edge. A few days later she be-
came another of Richelieu's victims. Of course he had set the whole thing
up, including the supposed surprise encounter.
Not only does suddenness create a seductive jolt, it conceals manipula-three years pass.] Now
during this time
Shahrazad had borne King
Shahriyar three sous. On
the thousand and first
night, when she had ended
the tale of Ma'aruf she
rose and kissed the ground
before him, saying: "Great
King, for a thousand and
one nights I have been
recounting to you the fables
of past ages and the
legends of ancient kings.
May I be so bold as to
crave a favor of your
majesty?" • The king
replied: "Ask, and it shall
be granted. " • Shahrazad
called out to the nurses,
saying: "Bring me my
children. " • . . . "Behold
these three [little boys]
whom Allah has granted to
us. For their sake I implore
you to spare my life. For if
you destroy the mother of
these infants, they will find
none among women to love
them as I would." • The
king embraced his three
sous, and his eyes filled
with tears as he answered:
"I swear by Allah,
Shahrazad, that you were
already pardoned before the
coming of these children.
I loved you because I
found you chaste and
tender, wise and eloquent.
May Allah bless you,
and bless your father and
mother, your ancestors,
and all your descendants.
O, Shahrazad, this
thousand and first night
is brighter for us than
the day!"
—TALES FROM THE THOUSAND
AND ONE NIGHTS, TRANSLATED
BY N.J. DAWOOD
