
Preparing for the Hunt
The young Vicomte de Valmont was a notorious libertine in the Paris of
the 1770s, the ruin of many a young girl and the ingenious seducer of
the wives of illustrious aristocrats. But after a while the repetitiveness of it
all began to bore him; his successes came too easily So one year, during the
sweltering, slow month of August, he decided to take a break from Paris
and visit his aunt at her château in the provinces. Life there was not what
he was used to—there were country walks, chats with the local vicar, card
games. His city friends, particularly his fellow libertine and confidante the
Marquise de Merteuil, expected him to hurry back.
There were other guests at the château, however, including the Prési-
dente de Tourvel, a twenty-two-year-old woman whose husband was tem-
porarily absent, having work to do elsewhere. The Présidente had been
languishing at the château, waiting for him to join her. Valmont had met
her before; she was certainly beautiful, but had a reputation as a prude who
was extremely devoted to her husband. She was not a court lady; her taste
in clothing was atrocious (she always covered her neck with ghastly frills)
and her conversation lacked wit. For some reason, however, far from Paris,
Valmont began to see these traits in a new light. He followed her to the
chapel where she went every morning to pray. He caught glimpses of her at
dinner, or playing cards. Unlike the ladies of Paris, she seemed unaware of
her charms; this excited him. Because of the heat, she wore a simple linen
dress, which revealed her figure. A piece of muslin covered her breasts, let-
ting him more than imagine them. Her hair, unfashionable in its slight dis-
order, conjured the bedroom. And her face—he had never noticed how
expressive it was. Her features lit up when she gave alms to a beggar; she
blushed at the slightest praise. She was so natural and unself-conscious. And
when she talked of her husband, or religious matters, he could sense the
depth of her feelings. If such a passionate nature were ever detoured into a
love affair. . . .
Valmont extended his stay at the château, much to the delight of his
aunt, who could not have guessed at the reason. And he wrote to the Mar-
quise de Merteuil, explaining his new ambition: to seduce Madame de
Tourvel. The Marquise was incredulous. He wanted to seduce this prude?
If he succeeded, how little pleasure she would give him, and if he failed,
what a disgrace—the great libertine unable to seduce a wife whose husband
was far away! She wrote a sarcastic letter, which only inflamed Valmont fur-The ninth • Have I
become blind? Has the
inner eye of the soul lost its
power? I have seen her, but
it is as if I had seen a
heavenly revelation—so
completely has her image
vanished again for me. In
vain do I summon all the
powers of my soul in order
to conjure up this image. If
I ever see her again, I shall
be able to recognize her
instantly, even though she
stands among a hundred
others. Now she has fled,
and the eye of my soul tries
in vain to overtake her
with its longing. I was
walking along Langelinie,
seemingly nonchalantly
and without paying
attention to my
surroundings, although my
reconnoitering glance left-
nothing unobserved—and
then my eyes fell upon her.
My eyes fixed
unswervingly upon her.
They no longer obeyed
their master's will; it was
impossible for me to shift
my gaze and thus overlook
the object I wanted to
see—I did not look, I
stared. As a fencer freezes
in his lunge, so my eyes
were fixed, petrified in the
direction initially taken. It
was impossible to look
169
