The Hot and Cold Coquette
In the autumn of 1795, Paris was caught up in a strange giddiness. The
Reign of Terror that had followed the French Revolution had ended; the
sound of the guillotine was gone. The city breathed a collective sigh of re-
lief, and gave way to wild parties and endless festivals.
The young Napoleon Bonaparte, twenty-six at the time, had no inter-
est in such revelries. He had made a name for himself as a bright, audacious
general who had helped quell rebellion in the provinces, but his ambition
was boundless and he burned with desire for new conquests. So when, in
October of that year, the infamous thirty-three-year-old widow Josephine
de Beauharnais visited his offices, he couldn't help but be confused. Jose-
phine was so exotic, and everything about her was languorous and sensual.
(She capitalized on her foreignness—she came from the island of Mar-
tinique.) On the other hand she had a reputation as a loose woman, and the
shy Napoleon believed in marriage. Even so, when Josephine invited him
to one of her weekly soirees, he found himself accepting.
At the soiree he felt totally out of his element. All of the city's great
writers and wits were there, as well as the few of the nobility who had
survived—Josephine herself was a vicomtesse, and had narrowly escaped
the guillotine. The women were dazzling, some of them more beautiful
than the hostess, but all the men congregated around Josephine, drawn by
her graceful presence and queenly manner. Several times she left the men
behind and went to Napoleon's side; nothing could have flattered his inse-
cure ego more than such attention.
He began to pay her visits. Sometimes she would ignore him, and he
would leave in a fit of anger. Yet the next day a passionate letter would ar-
rive from Josephine, and he would rush to see her. Soon he was spending
most of his time with her. Her occasional shows of sadness, her bouts of
anger or of tears, only deepened his attachment. In March of 1796, Napo-
leon married Josephine.
Two days after his wedding, Napoleon left to lead a campaign in northern
Italy against the Austrians. "You are the constant object of my thoughts,"
he wrote to his wife from abroad. "My imagination exhausts itself in guess-
ing what you are doing." His generals saw him distracted: he would leave
meetings early, spend hours writing letters, or stare at the miniature of
Josephine he wore around his neck. He had been driven to this state by the
unbearable distance between them and by a slight coldness he now detectedThere are indeed men who
are attached more by
resistance than by yielding
and who unwittingly prefer
a variable sky, now
splendid, now black and
vexed by lightnings, to
love's unclouded blue. Let
us not forget that Josephine
had to deal with a
conqueror and that love
resembles war. She did not
surrender, she let herself be
conquered. Had she been
more tender, more
attentive, more loving,
perhaps Bonaparte would
have loved her less.
—IMBERT DE SAINT-AMAND,
QUOTED IN THE EMPRESS
JOSEPHINE: NAPOLEON'S
ENCHANTRESS, PHILIP W.
SERGEANT
Coquettes know how to
please; not how to love,
which is why men love
them so much.
—PIERRE MARIVAUX
69
70 • The Art of Seduction
in her—she wrote infrequently, and her letters lacked passion; nor did she
join him in Italy. He had to finish his war fast, so that he could return to
her side. Engaging the enemy with unusual zeal, he began to make mis-
takes. "To live for Josephine!" he wrote to her. "I work to get near you; I
kill myself to reach you." His letters became more passionate and erotic; a
friend of Josephine's who saw them wrote, "The handwriting [was] almost
indecipherable, the spelling shaky, the style bizarre and confused .... What
a position for a woman to find herself in—being the motivating force be-
hind the triumphal march of an entire army."
Months went by in which Napoleon begged Josephine to come to Italy
and she made endless excuses. But finally she agreed to come, and left Paris
for Brescia, where he was headquartered. A near encounter with the enemy
along the way, however, forced her to detour to Milan. Napoleon was away
from Brescia, in battle; when he returned to find her still absent, he blamed
his foe General Würmser and swore revenge. For the next few months he
seemed to pursue two targets with equal energy: Wiirmser and Josephine.
His wife was never where she was supposed to be: "I reach Milan, rush to
your house, having thrown aside everything in order to clasp you in my
arms. You are not there!" Napoleon would turn angry and jealous, but
when he finally caught up with Josephine, the slightest of her favors melted
his heart. He took long rides with her in a darkened carriage, while his
generals fumed—meetings were missed, orders and strategies improvised.
"Never," he later wrote to her, "has a woman been in such complete mas-
tery of another's heart." And yet their time together was so short. During a
campaign that lasted almost a year, Napoleon spent a mere fifteen nights
with his new bride.
Napoleon later heard rumors that Josephine had taken a lover while he
was in Italy. His feelings toward her cooled, and he himself took an endless
series of mistresses. Yet Josephine was never really concerned about this
threat to her power over her husband; a few tears, some theatrics, a little
coldness on her part, and he remained her slave. In 1804, he had her
crowned empress, and had she born him a son, she would have remained
empress to the end. When Napoleon lay on his deathbed, the last word he
uttered was "Josephine."
During the French Revolution, Josephine had come within minutes of los-
ing her head on the guillotine. The experience left her without illusions,
and with two goals in mind: to live a life of pleasure, and to find the man
who could best supply it. She set her sights on Napoleon early on. He was
young, and had a brilliant future. Beneath his calm exterior, Josephine
sensed, he was highly emotional and aggressive, but this did not intimidate
her—it only revealed his insecurity and weakness. He would be easy to en-
slave. First, Josephine adapted to his moods, charmed him with her femi-
nine grace, warmed him with her looks and manner. He wanted to possess
her. And once she had aroused this desire, her power lay in postponing its
satisfaction, withdrawing from him, frustrating him. In fact the torture ofAn absence, the declining
of an invitation to dinner,
an unintentional,
unconscious harshness are
of more service than all
the cosmetics and fine
clothes in the world.
—MARCEL PROUST
There's also nightly, to the
unintiated, \ A peril—not
indeed like love or
marriage, \ But not the less
for this to he depreciated: \
It is—I meant and mean
not to disparage \ The
show of virtue even in the
vitiated— \ It adds an
outward grace unto their
carriage— \ But to
denounce the amphibious
sort of harlot, \ Couleur
de rose, who's neither
white nor scarlet. \ Such is
your cold coquette, who
can't say say "no," \And
won't say "yes," and keeps
you on- and off-ing \ On a
lee shore, till it begins to
blow— \ Then sees your
heart wreck'd with an
inward scoffing. \ This
works a world of
sentimental woe, \ And
sends new Werters yearly
to the coffin; \ But yet is
merely innocent flirtation, \
Not quite adultery, but
adulteration.
—LORD BYRON,
THE COLD COQUETTE
There is a way to represent
one's cause and in doing so
to treat the audience in
such a cool and
condescending manner that
they are bound to notice
one is not doing it to please
them. The principle should
always be not to make
concessions to those who
don't have anything to give
but who have everything to
gain from us. We can wait
