Appendix A: Seductive Environment/Seductive Time • 439
and to the casino after that, supplying her with a domino and a mask. He
gave her money to gamble and she won. By the time the uncle returned to
Treviso, she had all but forgotten about her marriage plans—all she could
think of was the six months she would spend with Casanova. But she re-
turned to her village with her uncle and waited for Casanova to visit her.
He showed up a few weeks later, bringing with him a handsome young
man named Charles. Alone with Cristina, Casanova explained the situa-
tion: Charles was the most eligible bachelor in Venice, a man who would
make a much better husband than he would. Cristina admitted to Casanova
that she too had had her doubts. He was too exciting, had made her think
of other things besides marriage, things she was ashamed of. Perhaps it was
for the better. She thanked him for taking such pains to find her a husband.
Over the next few days Charles courted her, and they were married several
weeks later. The fantasy and allure of Casanova, however, remained in her
mind forever.
Casanova could not marry—it was against everything in his nature. But it
was also against his nature to force himself on a young girl. Better to leave
her with the perfect fantasy image than to ruin her life. Besides, he enjoyed
the courting and flirting more than anything else.
Casanova supplied a young woman with the ultimate fantasy. While he
was in her orbit he devoted every moment to her. He never mentioned
work, allowing no boring, mundane details to interrupt the fantasy. And he
added great theater. He wore the most spectacular outfits, full of sparkling
jewels. He led her to the most wonderful entertainments—carnivals,
masked balls, the casinos, journeys with no destination. He was the great
master at creating seductive time and environment.
Casanova is the model to aspire to. While in your presence your targets
must sense a change. Time has a different rhythm—they barely notice its
passing. They have the feeling that everything is stopping for them, just as
all normal activity comes to a halt at a festival. The idle pleasures you pro-
vide them are contagious—one leads to another and to another, until it is
too late to turn back.

