158 • The Art of Seduction
older, they hanker after their lost youth; missing their long-lost innocence,
they begin to covet it in others.
If you should want to seduce them, you will probably have to be some-
what young and to have retained at least the appearance of innocence. It is
easy to play this up—make a show of how little experience you have in the
world, how you still see things as a child. It is also good to seem to resist
their advances: Roués will think it lively and exciting to chase you. You can
even seem to dislike or distrust them—that will really spur them on. By be-
ing the one who resists, you control the dynamic. And since you have the
youth that they are missing, you can maintain the upper hand and make
them fall deeply in love. They will often be susceptible to such a fall, be-
cause they have tamped down their own romantic tendencies for so long
that when it bursts forth, they lose control. Never give in too early, and
never let your guard down—such types can be dangerous.
The Idol Worshiper. Everyone feels an inner lack, but Idol Worshipers
have a bigger emptiness than most people. They cannot be satisfied with
themselves, so they search the world for something to worship, something
to fill their inner void. This often assumes the form of a great interest in
spiritual matters or in some worthwhile cause; by focusing on something
supposedly elevated, they distract themselves from their own void, from
what they dislike about themselves. Idol Worshipers are easy to spot—they
are the ones pouring their energies into some cause or religion. They often
move around over the years, leaving one cult for another.
The way to seduce these types is to simply become their object of wor-
ship, to take the place of the cause or religion to which they are so dedi-
cated. At first you may have to seem to share their spiritual interest, joining
them in their worship, or perhaps exposing them to a new cause; eventually
you will displace it. With this type you have to hide your flaws, or at least
to give them a saintly sheen. Be banal and Idol Worshipers will pass you by.
But mirror the qualities they aspire to have for themselves and they will
slowly transfer their adoration to you. Keep everything on an elevated
plane—let romance and religion flow into one.
Keep two things in mind when seducing this type. First, they tend to
have overactive minds, which can make them quite suspicious. Because
they often lack physical stimulation, and because physical stimulation will
distract them, give them some: a mountain trek, a boat trip, or sex will do
the trick. But this takes a lot of work, for their minds are always ticking.
Second, they often suffer from low self-esteem. Do not try to raise
it; they will see through you, and your efforts at praising them will clash
with their own self-image. They are to worship you; you are not to wor-
ship them. Idol Worshipers make perfectly adequate victims in the short
term, but their endless need to search will eventually lead them to look for
something new to adore.
The Sensualist. What marks these types is not their love of pleasure
but their overactive senses. Sometimes they show this quality in their
appearance—their interest in fashion, color, style. But sometimes it is
more subtle: because they are so sensitive, they are often quite shy, and
they will shrink from standing out or being flamboyant. You will recog-
nize them by how responsive they are to their environment, how they
cannot stand a room without sunlight, are depressed by certain colors, or
excited by certain smells. They happen to live in a culture that deempha-
sizes sensual experience (except perhaps for the sense of sight). And so
what the Sensualist lacks is precisely enough sensual experiences to appre-
ciate and relish.
The key to seducing them is to aim for their senses, to take them to
beautiful places, pay attention to detail, envelop them in spectacle, and of
course use plenty of physical lures. Sensualists, like animals, can be baited
with colors and smells. Appeal to as many senses as possible, keeping your
targets distracted and weak. Seductions of Sensualists are often easy and
quick, and you can use the same tactics again and again to keep them inter-
ested, although it is wise to vary your sensual appeals somewhat, in kind if
not in quality. That is how Cleopatra worked on Mark Antony, an inveter-
ate Sensualist. These types make superb victims because they are relatively
docile if you give them what they want.
The Lonely Leader. Powerful people are not necessarily different from
everyone else, but they are treated differently, and this has a big effect on
their personalities. Everyone around them tends to be fawning and
courtierlike, to have an angle, to want something from them. This makes
them suspicious and distrustful, and a little hard around the edges, but do
not mistake the appearance for the reality: Lonely Leaders long to be se-
duced, to have someone break through their isolation and overwhelm
them. The problem is that most people are too intimidated to try, or use
the kind of tactics—flattery, charm—that they see through and despise. To
seduce such types, it is better to act like their equal or even their superior—
the kind of treatment they never get. If you are blunt with them you will
seem genuine, and they will be touched—you care enough to be honest,
even perhaps at some risk. (Being blunt with the powerful can be danger-
ous.) Lonely Leaders can be made emotional by inflicting some pain, fol-
lowed by tenderness.
This is one of the hardest types to seduce, not only because they are
suspicious but because their minds are burdened with cares and responsi-
bilities. They have less mental space for a seduction. You will have to be pa-
tient and clever, slowly filling their minds with thoughts of you. Succeed,
though, and you can gain great power in turn, for in their loneliness they
will come to depend on you.The Seducer's Victims—The Eighteen Types • 159
