Confuse Desire and Reality—The Perfect Illusion • 301
tinople for the Orthodox Church, and drive the Turks out of Europe. She
offered to share this crusade with the young Hapsburg emperor, Joseph II,
but Joseph never quite brought himself to sign the treaty that would unite
them in war. Growing impatient, in 1783 Catherine annexed the Crimea, a
southern peninsula that was mostly populated by Muslim Tartars. She asked
Potemkin to do there what he had already managed to do in the Ukraine—
rid the area of bandits, build roads, modernize the ports, bring prosperity
to the poor. Once he had cleaned it up, the Crimea would make the per-
fect launching post for the war against Turkey
The Crimea was a backward wasteland, but Potemkin loved the chal-
lenge. Getting to work on a hundred different projects, he grew intoxicated
with visions of the miracles he would perform there. He would establish a
capital on the Dnieper River, Ekaterinoslav ("To the glory of Catherine"),
that would rival St. Petersburg and would house a university outshining
anything in Europe. The countryside would hold endless fields of corn, or-
chards with rare fruits from the Orient, silkworm farms, new towns with
bustling marketplaces. On a visit to the empress in 1785, Potemkin talked
of these things as if they already existed, so vivid were his descriptions. The
empress was delighted, but her ministers were skeptical—Potemkin loved
to talk. Ignoring their warnings, in 1787 Catherine arranged for a tour
of the area. She asked Joseph II to join her—he would be so impressed
with the modernization of the Crimea that he would immediately sign on
for the war against Turkey. Potemkin, naturally, was to organize the whole
affair.
And so, in May of that year, after the Dnieper had thawed, Catherine
prepared for a journey from Kiev, in the Ukraine, to Sebastopol, in the
Crimea. Potemkin arranged for seven floating palaces to carry Catherine
and her retinue down the river. The journey began, and as Catherine,
Joseph, and the courtiers looked at the shores to either side, they saw tri-
umphal arches in front of clean-looking towns, their walls freshly painted;
healthy-looking cattle grazing in the pastures; streams of marching troops
on the roads; buildings going up everywhere. At dusk they were enter-
tained by bright-costumed peasants, and smiling girls with flowers in their
hair, dancing on the shore. Catherine had traveled through this area many
years before, and the poverty of the peasantry there had saddened her—she
had determined then that she would somehow change their lot. To see be-
fore her eyes the signs of such a transformation overwhelmed her, and she
berated Potemkin's critics: Look at what my favorite has accomplished,
look at these miracles!
They anchored at three towns along the way, staying in each place in a
magnificent, newly built palace with artificial waterfalls in the English-style
gardens. On land they moved through villages with vibrant marketplaces;
the peasants were happily at work, building and repairing. Everywhere they
spent the night, some spectacle filled their eyes—dances, parades, mytho-
logical tableaux vivants, artificial volcanoes illuminating Moorish gardens.
Finally, at the end of the trip, in the palace at Sebastopol, Catherine andexpress realized before him
in movements and
surprising transformations—
standing, kneeling, sitting,
reclining, serious, sad,
playful, ecstatic, contrite,
alluring, threatening,
anxious, one pose follows
another without a break.
She knows how to arrange
the folds of her veil to
match each mood, and has
a hundred ways of turning
it into a headdress. The old
knight idolizes her and is
quite enthusiastic about
everything she does. In her
he has found all the
antiquities, all the profiles
of Sicilian coins, even the
Apollo Belvedere. This
much is certain: as a
performance it's like
nothing you ever saw before
in your life. We have
already enjoyed it on two
evenings."
—FLORA FRASER,
EMMA, LADY HAMILTON
For this uncanny is in
reality nothing new or
alien, but something which
is familiar and old-
established in the mind
and which has become
alienated from it only
through the process of
repression. This reference to
the factor of repression
enables us, furthermore, to
understand Schelling's
definition of the uncanny
as something which ought
to have remained hidden
but has come to light. . . .
• ... There is one more
point of general application
which I should like to add.
. . . This is that an
uncanny effect is often and
easily produced when the
distinction between
imagination and reality is
effaced, as when something
that we have hitherto
regarded as imaginary
302 • The Art of Seduction
Joseph discussed the war with Turkey. Joseph reiterated his concerns. Sud-
denly Potemkin interrupted: "I have 100,000 troops waiting for me to say
'Go!' " At that moment the windows of the palace were flung open, and to
the sounds of booming cannons they saw lines of troops as far as the eye
could see, and a fleet of ships filling the harbor. Awed by the sight, images
of Eastern European cities retaken from the Turks dancing in his mind,
Joseph II finally signed the treaty. Catherine was ecstatic, and her love for
Potemkin reached new heights. He had made her dreams come true.
Catherine never suspected that almost everything she had seen was pure
fakery, perhaps the most elaborate illusion ever conjured up by one man.
Interpretation. In the four years that he had been governor of the Crimea,
Potemkin had accomplished little, for this backwater would take decades to
improve. But in the few months before Catherine's visit he had done the
following: every building that faced the road or the shore was given a fresh
coat of paint; artificial trees were set up to hide unseemly spots in the view;
broken roofs were repaired with flimsy boards painted to look like tile;
everyone the party would see was instructed to wear their best clothes and
look happy; everyone old and infirm was to stay indoors. Floating in their
palaces down the Dnieper, the imperial entourage saw brand-new villages,
but most of the buildings were only facades. The herds of cattle were
shipped from great distances, and were moved at night to fresh fields along
the route. The dancing peasants were trained for the entertainments; after
each one they were loaded into carts and hurriedly transported to a new
downriver location, as were the marching soldiers who seemed to be every-
where. The gardens of the new palaces were filled with transplanted trees
that died a few days later. The palaces themselves were quickly and badly
built, but were so magnificently furnished that no one noticed. One
fortress along the way had been built of sand, and was destroyed a little later
by a thunderstorm.
The cost of this vast illusion had been enormous, and the war with
Turkey would fail, but Potemkin had accomplished his goal. To the obser-
vant, of course, there were signs along the way that all was not as it seemed,
but when the empress herself insisted that everything was real and glori-
ous, the courtiers could only agree. This was the essence of the seduction:
Catherine had wanted so desperately to be seen as a loving and progressive
ruler, one who would defeat the Turks and liberate Europe, that when she
saw signs of change in the Crimea, her mind filled in the picture.
When our emotions are engaged, we often have trouble seeing things as
they are. Feelings of love cloud our vision, making us color events to coin-
cide with our desires. To make people believe in the illusions you create,
you need to feed the emotions over which they have least control. Often
the best way to do this is to ascertain their unsatisfied desires, their wishes
crying out for fulfillment. Perhaps they want to see themselves as noble or
romantic, but life has thwarted them. Perhaps they want an adventure. Ifappears before us in reality,
or when a symbol takes
over the full functions of
the thing it symbolizes,
and so on. It is this factor
which contributes not a
little to the uncanny effect
attaching to magical
practices. The infantile
element in this, which also
dominates the minds of
neurotics, is the
overaccentuation of
psychical reality in
comparison with material
reality—a feature closely
allied to the belief in the
omnipotence of thoughts.
—SIGMUND FREUD,
"THE UNCANNY," IN
PSYCHOLOGICAL WRITINGS
AND LETTERS
