282 • The Art of Seduction
This need to idealize extends to our romantic entanglements, because
when we fall in love, or under the spell of another person, we see a reflec-
tion of ourselves. The choice we make in deciding to become involved
with another person reveals something important and intimate about us: we
resist seeing ourselves as having fallen for someone who is cheap or tacky or
tasteless, because it reflects badly on who we are. Furthermore, we are often
likely to fall for someone who resembles us in some way. Should that per-
son be deficient, or worst of all ordinary, then there is something deficient
and ordinary about us. No, at all costs the loved one must be overvalued
and idealized, at least for the sake of our own self-esteem. Besides, in a
world that is harsh and full of disappointment, it is a great pleasure to be
able to fantasize about a person you are involved with.
This makes the seducer's task easy: people are dying to be given the
chance to fantasize about you. Do not spoil this golden opportunity by
overexposing yourself, or becoming so familiar and banal that the target
sees you exactly as you are. You do not have to be an angel, or a paragon of
virtue—that would be quite boring. You can be dangerous, naughty, even
somewhat vulgar, depending on the tastes of your victim. But never be or-
dinary or limited. In poetry (as opposed to reality), anything is possible.
Soon after we fall under a person's spell, we form an image in our
minds of who they are and what pleasures they might offer. Thinking of
them when we are alone, we tend to make this image more and more ide-
alized. The novelist Stendhal, in his book On Love, calls this phenomenon
"crystallization," telling the story of how, in Salzburg, Austria, they used to
throw a leafless branch into the abandoned depths of a salt mine in the
middle of winter. When the branch was pulled out months later, it would
be covered with spectacular crystals. That is what happens to a loved one in
our minds.
According to Stendhal, though, there are two crystallizations. The first
happens when we first meet the person. The second and more important
one happens later, when a bit of doubt creeps in—you desire the other per-
son, but they elude you, you are not sure they are yours. This bit of doubt
is critical—it makes your imagination work double, deepens the poeticizing
process. In the seventeenth century, the great rake the Duc de Lauzun
pulled off one of the most spectacular seductions in history—that of the
Grande Mademoiselle, the cousin of King Louis XIV, and the wealthiest
and most powerful woman in France. He tickled her imagination with a
few brief encounters at the court, letting her catch glimpses of his wit, his
audacity, his cool manner. She would begin to think of him when she was
alone. Next she started to bump into him more often at court, and they
would have little conversations or walks. When these meetings were over,
she would be left with a doubt: is he or is he not interested in me? This
made her want to see him more, in order to allay her doubts. She began to
idealize him all out of proportion to the reality, for the duke was an incor-
rigible scoundrel.
Remember: if you are easily had, you cannot be worth that much. It iswander after a time because
one gets tired of anything
uniform, even perfect
happiness. • This is what
happens next to fix the
attention: • 6. Doubt
creeps in. . . . He is met
with indifference, coldness,
or even anger if he appears
too confident. . . . The
lover begins to be less sure
of the good fortune he was
anticipating and subjects
his grounds for hope to a
critical examination. • He
tries to recoup by indulging
in other pleasures but finds
them inane. He is seized
by the dread of a frightful
calamity and now
concentrates fully. Thus
begins: • 7. The second
crystallization, which
deposits diamond layers of
proof that "she loves me."
• Every few minutes
throughout the night which
follows the birth of doubt,
the lover has a moment of
dreadful misgiving, and
then reassures himself "she
loves me"; and
crystallization begins to
reveal new charms. Then
once again the haggard eye
of doubt pierces him and he
stops transfixed. He forgets
to draw breath and mutters,
"But does she love me?"
Torn between doubt and
delight, the poor lover
convinces himself that she
could give him such
pleasure as he could find
nowhere else on earth.
—STENDHAL, LOVE,
TRANSLATED BY GILBERT AND
SUZANNE SALE
Falling in love
automatically tends toward
madness. Left to itself, it
goes to utter extremes. This
is well known by the
"conquistadors" of both
sexes. Once a woman's
Poeticize Your Presence • 283
hard to wax poetic about a person who comes so cheaply. If, after the initial
interest, you make it clear that you cannot be taken for granted, if you stir a
bit of doubt, the target will imagine there is something special, lofty, and
unattainable about you. Your image will crystallize in the other person's
mind.
Cleopatra knew that she was really no different from any other woman,
and in fact her face was not particularly beautiful. But she knew that men
have a tendency to overvalue a woman. All that is required is to hint that
there is something different about you, to make them associate you with
something grand or poetic. She made Caesar aware of her connection to
the great kings and queens of Egypt's past; with Antony, she created the
fantasy that she was descended from Aphrodite herself. These men were ca-
vorting not just with a strong-willed woman but a kind of goddess. Such
associations might be difficult to pull off today, but people still get deep
pleasure from associating others with some kind of childhood fantasy fig-
ure. John F. Kennedy presented himself as a figure of chivalry—noble,
brave, charming. Pablo Picasso was not just a great painter with a thirst for
young girls, he was the Minotaur of Greek legend, or the devilish trickster
figure that is so seductive to women. These associations should not be made
too early; they are only powerful once the target has begun to fall under
your spell, and is vulnerable to suggestion. A man who had just met
Cleopatra would have found the Aphrodite association ludicrous. But a
person who is falling in love will believe almost anything. The trick is to as-
sociate your image with something mythic, through the clothes you wear,
the things you say, the places you go.
In Marcel Proust's novel Remembrance of Things Past, the character
Swann finds himself gradually seduced by a woman who is not really his
type. He is an aesthete, and loves the finer things in life. She is of a lower
class, less refined, even a little tasteless. What poeticizes her in his mind is a
series of exuberant moments they share together, moments that from then
on he associates with her. One of these is a concert in a salon that they at-
tend, in which he is intoxicated by a little melody in a sonata. Whenever he
thinks of her, he remembers this little phrase. Little gifts she has given him,
objects she has touched or handled, begin to assume a life of their own.
Any kind of heightened experience, artistic or spiritual, lingers in the mind
much longer than normal experience. You must find a way to share such
moments with your targets—a concert, a play, a spiritual encounter, what-
ever it takes—so that they associate something elevated with you. Shared
moments of exuberance have immense seductive pull. Also, any kind of
object can be imbued with poetic resonance and sentimental associations, as
discussed in the last chapter. The gifts you give and other objects can be-
come imbued with your presence; if they are associated with pleasant
memories, the sight of them keeps you in mind and accelerates the poeti-
cization process.
Although it is said that absence makes the heart grow fonder, an ab-
sence too early will prove deadly to the crystallization process. Like Evaattention is fixed upon a
man, it is very easy for
him to dominate her
thoughts completely. A
simple game of blowing
hot and cold, of
solicitousness and disdain,
of presence and absence is
all that is required. The
rhythm of that technique
acts upon a woman's
attention like a pneumatic
machine and ends by
emptying her of all the rest
of the world. How well our
people put it: "to suck
one's senses"! In fact: one
is absorbed—absorbed by
an object! Most "love
affairs" are reduced to this
mechanical play of the
beloved upon the lover's
attention. • The only thing
that can save a lover is a
violent shock from the
outside, a treatment which
is forced upon him. Many
think that absence and long
trips are a good cure for
lovers. Observe that these
are cures for one's
attention. Distance from
the beloved starves our
attention toward him; it
prevents anything further
from rekindling the
attention. Journeys, by
physically obliging us to
come out of ourselves and
resolve hundreds of little
problems, by uprooting us
from our habitual setting
and forcing hundreds of
unexpected objects upon us,
succeed in breaking down
the maniac's haven and
opening channels in his
sealed consciousness,
through which fresh air and
normal perspective enter.
—JOSÉ ORTEGA Y GASSET,
ON LOVE: ASPECTS OF A
SINGLE THEME, TRANSLATED BY
TOBY TALBOT
