The Charismatic • 105
in salons throughout the city, he led the guests in a folk song, and as they
sang, he began to dance, a strange uninhibited dance of his own design,
and as he danced, he circled the most attractive women there, and with his
eyes invited them to join him. The dance turned vaguely sexual; as his
partners fell under his spell, he whispered suggestive comments in their
ears. Yet none of them seemed to be offended.
Over the next few months, women from every level of St. Petersburg
society visited Rasputin in his apartment. He would talk to them of spiri-
tual matters, but then without warning he would turn sexual, murmuring
the crassest come-ons. He would justify himself through spiritual dogma:
how can you repent if you have not sinned? Salvation only comes to those
who go astray. One of the few who rejected his advances was asked by a
friend, "How can one refuse anything to a saint?" "Does a saint need sinful
love?" she replied. Her friend said, "He makes everything that comes near
him holy. I have already belonged to him, and I am proud and happy to
have done so." "But you are married! What does your husband say?" "He
considers it a very great honor. If Rasputin desires a woman we all think it
a blessing and a distinction, our husbands as well as ourselves."
Rasputin's spell soon extended over Czar Nicholas and more particu-
larly over his wife, the Czarina Alexandra, after he apparently healed their
son from a life-threatening injury. Within a few years, he had become the
most powerful man in Russia, with total sway over the royal couple.
People are more complicated than the masks they wear in society. The man
who seems so noble and gentle is probably disguising a dark side, which
will often come out in strange ways; if his nobility and refinement are in
fact a put-on, sooner or later the truth will out, and his hypocrisy will dis-
appoint and alienate. On the other hand, we are drawn to people who
seem more comfortably human, who do not bother to disguise their con-
tradictions. This was the source of Rasputin's charisma. A man so authenti-
cally himself, so devoid of self-consciousness or hypocrisy, was immensely
appealing. His wickedness and saintliness were so extreme that it made him
seem larger than life. The result was a charismatic aura that was immediate
and preverbal; it radiated from his eyes, and from the touch of his hands.
Most of us are a mix of the devil and the saint, the noble and the igno-
ble, and we spend our lives trying to repress the dark side. Few of us can
give free rein to both sides, as Rasputin did, but we can create charisma to a
smaller degree by ridding ourselves of self-consciousness, and of the dis-
comfort most of us feel about our complicated natures. You cannot help
being the way you are, so be genuine. That is what attracts us to animals:
beautiful and cruel, they have no self-doubt. That quality is doubly fasci-
nating in humans. Outwardly people may condemn your dark side, but it is
not virtue alone that creates charisma; anything extraordinary will do. Do
not apologize or go halfway. The more unbridled you seem, the more mag-
netic the effect.dark. A keen glance
reached her from the corner
of his eyes, bored into her,
and held her fascinated.
A leaden heaviness
overpowered her limbs as
his great wrinkled face,
distorted with desire, came
closer to hers. She felt his
hot breath on her cheeks,
and saw how his eyes,
burning from the depths of
their sockets, furtively roved
over her helpless body, until
he dropped his lids with a
sensuous expression. His
voice had fallen to a
passionate whisper, and he
murmured strange,
voluptuous words in her
ear. • Just as she was on
the point of abandoning
herself to her seducer, a
memory stirred in her
dimly and as if from some
far distance; she recalled
that she had come to ask
him about God.
—RENÉ FÜLÖP-MILLER,
RASPUTIN: THE HOLY DEVIL
106 • The Art of Seduction
The demonic performer. Throughout his childhood Elvis Presley was
thought a strange boy who kept pretty much to himself. In high school in
Memphis, Tennessee, he attracted attention with his pompadoured hair and
sideburns, his pink and black clothing, but people who tried to talk to him
found nothing there—he was either terribly bland or hopelessly shy. At the
high school prom, he was the only boy who didn't dance. He seemed lost
in a private world, in love with the guitar he took everywhere. At the Ellis
Auditorium, at the end of an evening of gospel music or wrestling, the
concessions manager would often find Elvis onstage, miming a perfor-
mance and taking bows before an imaginary audience. Asked to leave, he
would quietly walk away. He was a very polite young man.
In 1953, just out of high school, Elvis recorded his first song, in a local
studio. The record was a test, a chance for him to hear his own voice. A
year later the owner of the studio, Sam Phillips, called him in to record two
blues songs with a couple of professional musicians. They worked for
hours, but nothing seemed to click; Elvis was nervous and inhibited. Then,
near the end of the evening, giddy with exhaustion, he suddenly let loose
and started to jump around like a child, in a moment of complete self-
abandon. The other musicians joined in, the song getting wilder and
wilder. Phillips's eyes lit up—he had something here.
A month later Elvis gave his first public performance, outdoors in a
Memphis park. He was as nervous as he had been at the recording session,
and could only stutter when he had to speak; but once he broke into song,
the words came out. The crowd responded excitedly, rising to peaks at
certain moments. Elvis couldn't figure out why. "I went over to the man-
ager after the song," he later said, "and I asked him what was making the
crowd go nuts. He told me, 'I'm not really sure, but I think that every
time you wiggle your left leg, they start to scream. Whatever it is, just
don't stop.'
A single Elvis recorded in 1954 became a hit. Soon he was in demand.
Going onstage filled him with anxiety and emotion, so much so that he
became a different person, as if possessed. "I've talked to some singers
and they get a little nervous, but they say their nerves kind of settle down
after they get into it. Mine never do. It's sort of this energy . . . something
maybe like sex." Over the next few months he discovered more gestures
and sounds—twitching dance movements, a more tremulous voice—that
made the crowds go crazy, particularly teenage girls. Within a year he had
become the hottest musician in America. His concerts were exercises in
mass hysteria.
Elvis Presley had a dark side, a secret life. (Some have attributed it to the
death, at birth, of his twin brother.) This dark side he deeply repressed as a
young man; it included all kinds of fantasies which he could only give in to
when he was alone, although his unconventional clothing may also have
been a symptom of it. When he performed, though, he was able to let
these demons loose. They came out as a dangerous sexual power. Twitch-By its very nature, the
existence of charismatic
authority is specifically
unstable. The holder may
forego his charisma; he
may feel "forsaken by his
God," as Jesus did on the
cross; he may prove to his
followers that "virtue
is gone out of him." It is
then that his mission
is extinguished, and hope
waits and searches for a
new holder of charisma.
—MAX WEBER, FROM MAX
WEBER: ESSAYS IN SOCIOLOGY,
EDITED BY HANS GERTH AND
C. WRIGHT MILLS
