284 • The Art of Seduction
Perón, you must surround your targets with focused attention, so that in
those critical moments when they are alone, their mind is spinning with a
kind of afterglow. Do everything you can to keep the target thinking about
you. Letters, mementos, gifts, unexpected meetings—all these give you an
omnipresence. Everything must remind them of you.
Finally, if your targets should see you as elevated and poetic, there is
much to be gained by making them feel elevated and poeticized in their
turn. The French writer Chateaubriand would make a woman feel like a
goddess, she had such a powerful effect on him. He would send her poems
that she supposedly had inspired. To make Queen Victoria feel as if she
were both a seductive woman and a great leader, Benjamin Disraeli would
compare her to mythological figures and great predecessors, such as Queen
Elizabeth I. By idealizing your targets this way, you will make them idealize
you in return, since you must be equally great to be able to appreciate and
see all of their fine qualities. They will also grow addicted to the elevated
feeling you give them.
Symbol: The Halo.
Slowly, when the target is alone, he or she begins to
imagine a kind of faint glow around your head, formed by all of
the possible pleasures you might offer, the radiance of your charged
presence, your noble qualities. The Halo separates you from other
people. Do not make it disappear by becoming fa-
miliar and ordinary.
Reversal
It might seem that the reverse tactic would be to reveal everything about
yourself, to be completely honest about your faults and virtues. This kind
of sincerity was a quality Lord Byron had—he almost got a thrill out of
disclosing all of his nasty, ugly qualities, even going so far, later on in his
life, as to tell people about his incestuous involvements with his half sister.
This kind of dangerous intimacy can be immensely seductive. The target
will poeticize your vices, and your honesty about them; they will start to
see more than is there. In other words, the idealization process is unavoid-
able. The only thing that cannot be idealized is mediocrity, but there is
nothing seductive about mediocrity. There is no possible way to seduce
without creating some kind of fantasy and poeticization.Excessive familiarity can
destroy crystallization. A
charming girl of sixteen
was becoming too fond of a
handsome young man of
the same age, who used to
make a practice of passing
beneath her window every
evening at nightfall. Her
mother invited him to
spend a week with them
in the country. It was a
bold remedy, I admit,
but the girl was of a
romantic disposition, and
the young man a trifle
dull; within three days she
despised him.
—STENDHAL, LOVE,
TRANSLATED BY GILBERT AND
SUZANNE SALE
Disarm Through Strategic Weakness
and Vulnerability
Too much ma-
neuvering on your part may raise
suspicion. The best way to cover your tracks
is to make the other person feel superior and
stronger. If you seem to be weak, vulnerable, enthralled
by the other person, and unable to control yourself, you will
make your actions look more natural, less calculated. Physical
weakness—tears, bashfulness, paleness—will help create the ef-
fect. To further win trust, exchange honesty for virtue: establish
your "sincerity" by confessing some sin on your part—it doesn't
have to be real. Sincerity is more important than goodness. Play
the victim, then transform your target's sympathy into love.
