The Lost Self
In March of 1812, the twenty-four-year-old George Gordon Byron pub-
lished the first cantos of his poem Childe Harold. The poem was filled
with familiar gothic imagery—a dilapidated abbey, debauchery, travels to
the mysterious East—but what made it different was that the hero of the
poem was also its villain: Harold was a man who led a life of vice, disdain-
ing society's conventions yet somehow going unpunished. Also, the poem
was not set in some faraway land but in present-day England. Childe Harold
created an instant stir, becoming the talk of London. The first printing
quickly sold out. Within days a rumor made the rounds: the poem, about a
debauched young nobleman, was in fact autobiographical.
Now the cream of society clamored to meet Lord Byron, and many of
them left their calling cards at his London residence. Soon he was showing
up at their homes. Strangely enough, he exceeded their expectations. He
was devilishly handsome, with curling hair and the face of an angel. His
black attire set off his pale complexion. He did not talk much, which made
an impression of itself, and when he did, his voice was low and hypnotic
and his tone a little disdainful. He had a limp (he was born with a clubfoot),
so when an orchestra struck up a waltz (the dance craze of 1812), he would
stand to the side, a faraway look in his eye. The ladies went wild over By-
ron. Upon meeting him, Lady Roseberry felt her heart beating so violently
(a mix of fear and excitement) that she had to walk away. Women fought to
be seated next to him, to win his attention, to be seduced by him. Was it
true that he was guilty of a secret sin, like the hero of his poem?
Lady Caroline Lamb—wife of William Lamb, son of Lord and Lady
Melbourne—was a glittering young woman on the social scene, but deep
inside she was unhappy. As a young girl she had dreamt of adventure, ro-
mance, travel. Now she was expected to play the role of the polite young
wife, and it did not suit her. Lady Caroline was one of the first to read
Childe Harold, and something more than its novelty stirred her. When she
saw Lord Byron at a dinner party, surrounded by women, she looked at his
face, then walked away; that night she wrote of him in her journal, "Mad,
bad, and dangerous to know." She added, "That beautiful pale face is my
fate."
The next day, to Lady Caroline's surprise, Lord Byron called on her.
Evidently he had seen her walking away from him, and her shyness had in-
trigued him—he disliked the aggressive women who were constantly at hisIt is a matter of a certain
hind of feeling: that of
being overwhelmed. There
are many who have a great
fear of bring overwhelmed
by someone; for example,
someone who makes them
laugh against their will, or
tickles them to death, or,
worse, tells them things
that they sense to be
accurate but which they do
not quite understand,
things that go beyond their
prejudices and received
wisdom, In other words,
they do not want to be
seduced, since seduction
means confronting people
with their limits, limits
that are supposed to be set
and stable but that the
seducer suddenly causes to
waver. Seduction is the
desire of being
overwhelmed, taken
beyond.
—DANIEL SIBONY,
L'AMOUR INCONSCIENT
Just lately I saw a tight-
reined stallion \ Get the bit
in his teeth and bolt \ Like
lightning—yet the minute
he felt the reins slacken, \
Drop loose on his flying
mane, \ He stopped dead.
351
352 • The Art of Seduction
heels, as it seemed he disdained everything, including his success. Soon he
was visiting Lady Caroline daily. He lingered in her boudoir, played with
her children, helped her choose her dress for the day. She pressed him to
talk of his life: he described his brutal father, the untimely deaths that
seemed to be a family curse, the crumbling abbey he had inherited, his ad-
ventures in Turkey and Greece. His life was indeed as gothic as that of
Childe Harold.
Within days the two became lovers. Now, though, the tables turned:
Lady Caroline pursued Byron with unladylike aggression. She dressed as a
page and sneaked into his carriage, wrote him extravagantly emotional let-
ters, flaunted the affair. At last, a chance to play the grand romantic role of
her girlhood fantasies. Byron began to turn against her. He already loved to
shock; now he confessed to her the nature of the secret sin he had alluded
to in Childe Harold—his homosexual affairs during his travels. He made
cruel remarks, grew indifferent. But this only seemed to push her further.
She sent him the customary lock of hair, but from her pubis; she followed
him in the street, made public scenes—finally her family sent her abroad to
avoid further scandal. After Byron made it clear the affair was over, she de-
scended into a madness that would last several years.
In 1813, an old friend of Byron's, James Webster, invited the poet to
stay at his country estate. Webster had a young and beautiful wife, Lady
Frances, and he knew Byron's reputation as a seducer, but his wife was
quiet and chaste—surely she would resist the temptation of a man such as
Byron. To Webster's relief, Byron barely spoke to Frances, who seemed
equally uninterested in him. Yet several days into Byron's stay, she contrived
to be alone with him in the billiards room, where she asked him a question:
how could a woman who liked a man inform him of it when he did not
perceive it? Byron scribbled a racy reply on a piece of paper, which made
her blush as she read it. Soon thereafter he invited the couple to stay with
him at his infamous abbey. There, the prim and proper Lady Frances saw
him drink wine from a human skull. They stayed up late in one of the
abbey's secret chambers, reading poetry and kissing. With Byron, it seemed,
Lady Frances was only too eager to explore adultery.
That same year, Lord Byron's half sister Augusta arrived in London to
get away from her husband, who was having money troubles. Byron had
not seen Augusta for some time. The two were physically similar—the
same face, the same mannerisms; she was Lord Byron as a woman. And his
behavior toward her was more than brotherly. He took her to the theater,
to dances, received her at home, treating her with an intimate spirit that
Augusta soon returned. Indeed the kind and tender attention that Byron
showered on her soon became physical.
Augusta was a devoted wife with three children, yet she yielded to her
half brother's advances. How could she help herself? He stirred up a strange
passion in her, a stronger passion than she felt for any other man, including
her husband. For Byron, his relationship with Augusta was the ultimate and
crowning sin of his career. And soon he was writing to his friends, openlyWe eternally chafe at
restrictions, covet \
Whatever's forbidden.
(Look how a sick man
who's told \ No immersion
hangs round the bath-
house.) \ . . . Desire \
Mounts for what's kept out
of reach. A thief's attracted
\ By burglar-proof
premises. How often will
love \ Thrive on a rival's
approval? It's not your
wife's beauty, but your own
\ Passion for her that gets
us—she must \ Have
something, just to have
hooked you. A girl locked
up by her \ Husband's not
chaste but pursued, her
fear's \ A bigger draw than
her figure. Illicit passion—
like it \ Or not—is
sweeter. It only turns me
on \ When the girl says,
"I'm frightened."
—OVID, THE AMORES,
TRANSLATED BY PETER GREEN
It is often not possible for
[women] later on to undo
the connection thus formed
in their minds between
sensual activities and
something forbidden, and
they turn out to be
psychically impotent, i.e.
frigid, when at last such
activities do become
permissible. This is the
source of the desire in so
many women to keep even
legitimate relations secret
for a time; and of the
appearance of the capacity
for normal sensation in
others as soon as the
condition of prohibition is
restored by a secret
intrigue—untrue to the
husband, they can keep a
second order of faith with
the lover. • In my opinion
the necessary condition of
forbiddenness in the erotic
life of women holds the
same place as the man's
