The Natural • 59
him the way you would for a lost dog. You both laughed and cried. And
audiences sensed that the role Chaplin played came from somewhere deep
inside—that he was sincere, that he was actually playing himself. Within
a few years after Making a Living, Chaplin was the most famous actor
in the world. There were Chaplin dolls, comic books, toys; popular songs
and short stories were written about him; he became a universal icon. In
1921, when he returned to London for the first time since he had left it, he
was greeted by enormous crowds, as if at the triumphant return of a great
general.
The greatest seducers, those who seduce mass audiences, nations, the
world, have a way of playing on people's unconscious, making them react
in a way they can neither understand nor control. Chaplin inadvertently hit
on this power when he discovered the effect he could have on audiences by
playing up his weakness, by suggesting that he had a child's mind in an adult
body. In the early twentieth century, the world was radically and rapidly
changing. People were working longer and longer hours at increasingly
mechanical jobs; life was becoming steadily more inhuman and heartless, as
the ravages of World War I made clear. Caught in the midst of revolution-
ary change, people yearned for a lost childhood that they imagined as a
golden paradise.
An adult child like Chaplin has immense seductive power, for he offers
the illusion that life was once simpler and easier, and that for a moment, or
for as long as the movie lasts, you can win that life back. In a cruel, amoral
world, naivete has enormous appeal. The key is to bring it off with an air
of total seriousness, as the straight man does in stand-up comedy. More im-
portant, however, is the creation of sympathy. Overt strength and power is
rarely seductive—it makes us afraid, or envious. The royal road to seduction
is to play up your vulnerability and helplessness. You cannot make this ob-
vious; to seem to be begging for sympathy is to seem needy, which is en-
tirely anti-seductive. Do not proclaim yourself a victim or underdog, but
reveal it in your manner, in your confusion. A display of "natural" weak-
ness will make you instantly lovable, both lowering people's defenses and
making them feel delightfully superior to you. Put yourself in situations
that make you seem weak, in which someone else has the advantage; they
are the bully, you are the innocent lamb. Without any effort on your part,
people will feel sympathy for you. Once people's eyes cloud over with
sentimental mist, they will not see how you are manipulating them.
2. Emma Crouch, born in 1842 in Plymouth, England, came from a re-
spectable middle-class family. Her father was a composer and music profes-
sor who dreamed of success in the world of light opera. Among his many
children, Emma was his favorite: she was a delightful child, lively and flirta-
tious, with red hair and a freckled face. Her father doted on her, and prom-
ised her a brilliant future in the theater. Unfortunately Mr. Crouch had a"Geographical" escapism
has been rendered
ineffective by the spread of
air routes. What remains is
"evolutionary" escapism—
a downward course in one's
development, back to the
ideas and emotions of
"golden childhood," which
may well be defined as
"regress towards
infantilism," escape to a
personal world of childish
ideas. • In a strictly-
regulated society, where life
follows strictly-defined
canons, the urge to escape
from the chain of things
"established once and for
all" must be felt
particularly strongly. . . . •
And the most perfect of
them [comedians] does this
with utmost perfection, for
he [Chaplin] serves this
principle . . . through the
subtlety of his method
which, offering the
spectactor an infantile
pattern to be imitated,
pscyhologically infects him
with infantilism and draws
him into the "golden age"
of the infantile paradise of
childhood.
—SERGEI EISENSTEIN, "CHARLIE
THE KID," FROM NOTES OF A
FILM DIRECTOR
60 • The Art of Seduction
dark side: he was an adventurer, a gambler, and a rake, and in 1849 he
abandoned his family and left for America. The Crouches were now in dire
straits. Emma was told that her father had died in an accident and she was
sent off to a convent. The loss of her father affected her deeply, and as the
years went by she seemed lost in the past, acting as if he still doted on her.
One day in 1856, when Emma was walking home from church, a well-
dressed gentleman invited her home for some cakes. She followed him to
his house, where he proceeded to take advantage of her. The next morning
this man, a diamond merchant, promised to set her up in a house of her
own, treat her well, and give her plenty of money. She took the money but
left him, determined to do what she had always wanted: never see her
family again, never depend on anyone, and lead the grand life that her fa-
ther had promised her.
With the money the diamond merchant had given her, Emma bought
nice clothes and rented a cheap flat. Adopting the flamboyant name of
Cora Pearl, she began to frequent London's Argyll Rooms, a fancy gin
palace where harlots and gentlemen rubbed elbows. The proprietor of the
Argyll, a Mr. Bignell, took note of this newcomer to his establishment—
she was so brazen for a young girl. At forty-five, he was much older
than she was, but he decided to be her lover and protector, lavishing her
with money and attention. The following year he took her to Paris, which
was at the height of its Second Empire prosperity. Cora was enthralled by
Paris, and of all its sights, but what impressed her the most was the parade
of rich coaches in the Bois de Boulogne. Here the fashionable came to take
the air—the empress, the princesses, and, not least the grand courtesans,
who had the most opulent carriages of all. This was the way to lead the
kind of life Cora's father had wanted for her. She promptly told Bignell that
when he went back to London, she would stay on alone.
Frequenting all the right places, Cora soon came to the attention of
wealthy French gentlemen. They would see her walking the streets in a
bright pink dress, to complement her flaming red hair, pale face, and freck-
les. They would glimpse her riding wildly through the Bois de Boulogne,
cracking her whip left and right. They would see her in cafes surrounded
by men, her witty insults making them laugh. They also heard of her
exploits—of her delight in showing her body to one and all. The elite of
Paris society began to court her, particularly the older men who had grown
tired of the cold and calculating courtesans, and who admired her girlish
spirit. As money began to pour in from her various conquests (the Duc de
Mornay, heir to the Dutch throne; Prince Napoleon, cousin to the Em-
peror), Cora spent it on the most outrageous things—a multicolored car-
riage pulled by a team of cream-colored horses, a rose-marble bathtub with
her initials inlaid in gold. Gentlemen vied to be the one who would spoil
her the most. An Irish lover wasted his entire fortune on her, in only eight
weeks. But money could not buy Cora's loyalty; she would leave a man on
the slightest whim.
Cora Pearl's wild behavior and disdain for etiquette had all of Paris onPrince Gortschakoff used
to say that she [Cora
Pearl] was the last word in
luxury, and that he would
have tried to steal the sun
to satisfy one of her whims.
—GUSTAVE CLAUDIN, CORA
PEARL CONTEMPORARY
Apparently the possession of
humor implies the
possession of a number of
typical habit-systems. The
first is an emotional one: the
habit of playfulness. Why
should one be proud of
being playful? For a double
reason. First, playfulness
connotes childhood and
youth. If one can be playful,
one still possesses something
of the vigor and the joy of
young life . . . • But there
is a deeper implication. To
be playful is, in a sense, to
be free. When a person is
playful, he momentarily
disregards the binding
necessities which compel
him, in business and morals,
in domestic and community
life. . . . • What galls us is
that the binding necessities
do not permit us to shape
our world as we please. . . .
What we most deeply
desire, however, is to create
our world for ourselves.
Whenever we can do
that, even in the slightest
degree, we are happy. Now
in play we create our own
world. . . .
—PROFESSOR H.A.
OVERSTREET, INFLUENCING
HUMAN BEHAVIOR
