The Siren • 9
Her voice, which all writers talk of, was lilting and intoxicating. Her words
could be banal enough, but were spoken so sweetly that listeners would
find themselves remembering not what she said but how she said it.
Cleopatra provided constant variety—tributes, mock battles, expedi-
tions, costumed orgies. Everything had a touch of drama and was accom-
plished with great energy. By the time your head lay on the pillow beside
her, your mind was spinning with images and dreams. And just when you
thought you had this fluid, larger-than-life woman, she would turn distant
or angry, making it clear that everything was on her terms. You never pos-
sessed Cleopatra, you worshiped her. In this way a woman who had been
exiled and destined for an early death managed to turn it all around and
rule Egypt for close to twenty years.
From Cleopatra we learn that it is not beauty that makes a Siren but
rather a theatrical streak that allows a woman to embody a man's fantasies.
A man grows bored with a woman, no matter how beautiful; he yearns for
different pleasures, and for adventure. All a woman needs to turn this
around is to create the illusion that she offers such variety and adventure. A
man is easily deceived by appearances; he has a weakness for the visual.
Create the physical presence of a Siren (heightened sexual allure mixed
with a regal and theatrical manner) and he is trapped. He cannot grow
bored with you yet he cannot discard you. Keep up the distractions, and
never let him see who you really are. He will follow you until he drowns.
The Sex Siren
Norma Jean Mortensen, the future Marilyn Monroe, spent part of her
childhood in Los Angeles orphanages. Her days were filled with
chores and no play. At school, she kept to herself, smiled rarely, and
dreamed a lot. One day when she was thirteen, as she was dressing for
school, she noticed that the white blouse the orphanage provided for her
was torn, so she had to borrow a sweater from a younger girl in the house.
The sweater was several sizes too small. That day, suddenly, boys seemed to
gather around her wherever she went (she was extremely well-developed
for her age). She wrote in her diary, "They stared at my sweater as if it were
a gold mine."
The revelation was simple but startling. Previously ignored and even
ridiculed by the other students, Norma Jean now sensed a way to gain at-
tention, maybe even power, for she was wildly ambitious. She started to
smile more, wear makeup, dress differently. And soon she noticed some-
thing equally startling: without her having to say or do anything, boys fell
passionately in love with her. "My admirers all said the same thing in differ-
ent ways," she wrote. "It was my fault, their wanting to kiss me and hug
me. Some said it was the way I looked at them—with eyes full of passion.
Others said it was my voice that lured them on. Still others said I gave off
vibrations that floored them."of an abyss . . . ?
Seduction lies in the
annulment of signs and
their meaning, in pure
appearance. The eyes that
seduce have no meaning,
they end in the gaze, as
the face with makeup
ends in only pure
appearance. . . . The scent
of the panther is also a
meaningless message—and
behind the message the
panther is invisible, as is
the woman beneath her
makeup. The Sirens too
remained unseen. The
enchantment lies in what
is hidden.
—JEAN BAUDRILLARD, DE LA
SÉDUCTION
We're dazzled by feminine
adornment, by the surface,
\ All gold and jewels: so
little of what we observe \
Is the girl herself And
where (you may ask) amid
such plenty \ Can our
object of passion be found?
The eye's deceived \ By
Love's smart camouflage.
—OVID, CURES FOR LOVE,
TRANSLATED BY PETER GREEN
He was herding his cattle
on Mount Gargarus, the
highest peak of Ida, when
Hermes, accompanied by
Hera, Athene, and
Aphrodite delivered the
golden apple and Zeus's
message: "Paris, since you
are as handsome as you are
wise in affairs of the heart,
Zeus commands you to
judge which of these
goddesses is the fairest. " •
"So be it," sighed Paris.
"But first I beg the losers
not to be vexed with me. I
am only a human being,
liable to make the stupidest
10 • The Art of Seduction
A few years later Marilyn was trying to make it in the film business.
Producers would tell her the same thing: she was attractive enough in per-
son, but her face wasn't pretty enough for the movies. She was getting
work as an extra, and when she was on-screen—even if only for a few sec-
onds—the men in the audience would go wild, and the theaters would
erupt in catcalls. But nobody saw any star quality in this. One day in 1949,
only twenty-three at the time and her career at a standstill, Monroe met
someone at a diner who told her that a producer casting a new Groucho
Marx movie, Love Happy, was looking for an actress for the part of a blond
bombshell who could walk by Groucho in a way that would, in his words,
"arouse my elderly libido and cause smoke to issue from my ears." Talking
her way into an audition, she improvised this walk. "It's Mae West, Theda
Bara, and Bo Peep all rolled into one," said Groucho after watching her
saunter by. "We shoot the scene tomorrow morning." And so Marilyn cre-
ated her infamous walk, a walk that was hardly natural but offered a strange
mix of innocence and sex.
Over the next few years, Marilyn taught herself through trial and er-
ror how to heighten the effect she had on men. Her voice had always been
attractive—it was the voice of a little girl. But on film it had limitations un-
til someone finally taught her to lower it, giving it the deep, breathy tones
that became her seductive trademark, a mix of the little girl and the vixen.
Before appearing on set, or even at a party, Marilyn would spend hours be-
fore the mirror. Most people assumed this was vanity—she was in love with
her image. The truth was that image took hours to create. Marilyn spent
years studying and practicing the art of makeup. The voice, the walk, the
face and look were all constructions, an act. At the height of her fame, she
would get a thrill by going into bars in New York City without her makeup
or glamorous clothes and passing unnoticed.
Success finally came, but with it came something deeply annoying to
her: the studios would only cast her as the blond bombshell. She wanted se-
rious roles, but no one took her seriously for those parts, no matter how
hard she downplayed the siren qualities she had built up. One day, while she
was rehearsing a scene from The Cherry Orchard, her acting instructor, Mi-
chael Chekhov, asked her, "Were you thinking of sex while we played the
scene?" When she said no, he continued, "All through our playing of the
scene I kept receiving sex vibrations from you. As if you were a woman in
the grip of passion. ... I understand your problem with your studio now,
Marilyn. You are a woman who gives off sex vibrations—no matter what
you are doing or thinking. The whole world has already responded to those
vibrations. They come off the movie screens when you are on them."
Marilyn Monroe loved the effect her body could have on the male libido.
She tuned her physical presence like an instrument, making herself reek of
sex and gaining a glamorous, larger-than-life appearance. Other women
knew just as many tricks for heightening their sexual appeal, but what sepa-
rated Marilyn from them was an unconscious element. Her backgroundmistakes." • The
goddesses all agreed to
abide by his decision. •
"Will it be enough to
judge them as they are?"
Paris asked Hermes, "or
should they he naked?" •
"The rules of the contest
are for you to decide,"
Hermes answered with a
discreet smile. • "In that
case, will they kindly
disrobe?" • Hermes told
the goddesses to do so, and
politely turned his back. •
Aphrodite was soon ready,
but Athene insisted that
she should remove the
famous magic girdle, which
gave her an unfair
advantage by making
everyone fall in love
withthe wearer. "Very
well" said Aphrodite
spitefully. "I will, on
condition that you remove
your helmet—you look
hideous without it. " •
"Now, if you please, 1
must judge you one at
a time" announced
Paris. . . . Come here,
Divine Hera! Will you
other two goddesses be good
enough to leave us for a
while?" • "Examine me
conscientiously," said Hera,
turning slowly around, and
displaying her magnificent
figure, "and remember that
if you judge me the fairest,
1 will make you lord of all
Asia, and the richest man
alive. " • "I am not to be
bribed my Lady . . . Very
well, thank you. Now I
have seen all that I need to
see. Come, Divine
Athene!" • "Here I am,"
said Athene, striding
purposefully forward.
"Listen, Paris, if you have
enough common sense to
award me the prize, I will
make you victorious in
all your battles, as well
as the handsomest and
wisest man in the world."
• "I am a humble
