454 • Appendix B: Soft Seduction: How to Sell Anything to the Masses
crowd. Such environments have profound effects on people. A clearheaded
person could probably tell that the magic shows are fake, the fierce animals
trained, the dangerous stunts relatively safe. But people want to be enter-
tained; it is one of their greatest needs. Surrounded by color and excite-
ment, they suspend their disbelief for a while and imagine that the magic
and danger are real. They are fascinated by what seems to be both fake and
real at the same time. Harry's publicity stunts merely re-created the carnival
on a larger scale. He pulled people in with the lure of colorful costumes, a
great story, irresistible spectacle. He held their attention with mystery, con-
troversy, whatever it took. Catching a kind of fever, as they would at the
carnival, they flocked without thinking to the films he publicized.
The lines between fiction and reality, news and entertainment are even
more blurred today than in Harry Reichenbach's time. What opportunities
that presents for soft seduction! The media is desperate for events with en-
tertainment value, inherent drama. Feed that need. The public has a weak-
ness for what seems both realistic and slightly fantastical—for real events
with a cinematic edge. Play to that weakness. Stage events the way Bernays
did, events the media can pick up as news. But here you are not starting a
social trend, you are after something more short term: to win people's at-
tention, to create a momentary stir, to lure them into your tent. Make your
events and publicity stunts plausible and somewhat realistic, but make their
colors a little brighter than usual, the characters larger than life, the drama
higher. Provide an edge of sex and danger. You are creating a confluence of
real life and fiction—the essence of any seduction.
It is not enough, however, to win people's attention: you need to hold
it long enough to hook them. This can always be done by sparking contro-
versy, the way Harry liked to stir up debates about morals. While the media
argues about the effect you are having on people's values, it is broadcasting
your name everywhere and inadvertently bestowing upon you the edge
that will make you so attractive to the public.
Selected Bibliography
Baudrillard, Jean. Seduction. Trans. Brian Singer. New York: St. Martin's Press,
1990.
Bourdon, David. Warhol. New York: Harry N. Abrams, Inc., 1989.
Capellanus, Andreas. Andreas Capellanus on Love. Trans. P. G. Walsh. London: Ger-
ald Duckworth & Co. Ltd., 1982.
Casanova, Jacques. The Memoirs of Jacques Casanova, in eight volumes. Trans. Arthur
Machen. Edinburgh: Limited Editions Club, 1940.
Chalon, Jean. Portrait of a Seductress: The World of Natalie Barney. Trans. Carol
Barko. New York: Crown Publishers, Inc., 1979.
Cole, Hubert. First Gentleman of the Bedchamber: The Life of Louis-François Armand,
Maréchal Duc de Richelieu. New York: Viking, 1965.
de Troyes, Chrétien. Arthurian Romances. Trans. William W Kibler. London: Pen-
guin Books, 1991.
Feher, Michel, ed. The Libertine Reader: Eroticism and Enlightenment in
Eighteenth-Century France. New York: Zone Books, 1997.
Flynn, Errol. My Wicked, Wicked Ways. New York: G. P. Putnam's Sons, 1959.
Freud, Sigmund. Psychological Writings and Letters. Ed. Sander L. Gilman. New
York: The Continuum Publishing Company, 1995.
——. Sexuality and the Psychology of Love. Ed. Philip Rieff. New York: Touch-
stone, 1963.
Fülöp-Miller, René. Rasputin: The Holy Devil. New York: Viking, 1962.
George, Don. Sweet Man: The Real Duke Ellington. New York: G. P. Putnam's
Sons, 1981.
Gleichen-Russwurm, Alexander von. The World's Lure: Fair Women, Their Loves,
Their Power, Their Fates. Trans. Hannah Waller. New York: Alfred A. Knopf,
1927.
Hahn, Emily. Lorenzo: D. H. Lawrence and the Women Who Loved Him. Philadel-
phia: J. B. Lippincott Company, 1975.
455
