
The Hot and Cold Coquette
In the autumn of 1795, Paris was caught up in a strange giddiness. The
Reign of Terror that had followed the French Revolution had ended; the
sound of the guillotine was gone. The city breathed a collective sigh of re-
lief, and gave way to wild parties and endless festivals.
The young Napoleon Bonaparte, twenty-six at the time, had no inter-
est in such revelries. He had made a name for himself as a bright, audacious
general who had helped quell rebellion in the provinces, but his ambition
was boundless and he burned with desire for new conquests. So when, in
October of that year, the infamous thirty-three-year-old widow Josephine
de Beauharnais visited his offices, he couldn't help but be confused. Jose-
phine was so exotic, and everything about her was languorous and sensual.
(She capitalized on her foreignness—she came from the island of Mar-
tinique.) On the other hand she had a reputation as a loose woman, and the
shy Napoleon believed in marriage. Even so, when Josephine invited him
to one of her weekly soirees, he found himself accepting.
At the soiree he felt totally out of his element. All of the city's great
writers and wits were there, as well as the few of the nobility who had
survived—Josephine herself was a vicomtesse, and had narrowly escaped
the guillotine. The women were dazzling, some of them more beautiful
than the hostess, but all the men congregated around Josephine, drawn by
her graceful presence and queenly manner. Several times she left the men
behind and went to Napoleon's side; nothing could have flattered his inse-
cure ego more than such attention.
He began to pay her visits. Sometimes she would ignore him, and he
would leave in a fit of anger. Yet the next day a passionate letter would ar-
rive from Josephine, and he would rush to see her. Soon he was spending
most of his time with her. Her occasional shows of sadness, her bouts of
anger or of tears, only deepened his attachment. In March of 1796, Napo-
leon married Josephine.
Two days after his wedding, Napoleon left to lead a campaign in northern
Italy against the Austrians. "You are the constant object of my thoughts,"
he wrote to his wife from abroad. "My imagination exhausts itself in guess-
ing what you are doing." His generals saw him distracted: he would leave
meetings early, spend hours writing letters, or stare at the miniature of
Josephine he wore around his neck. He had been driven to this state by the
unbearable distance between them and by a slight coldness he now detectedThere are indeed men who
are attached more by
resistance than by yielding
and who unwittingly prefer
a variable sky, now
splendid, now black and
vexed by lightnings, to
love's unclouded blue. Let
us not forget that Josephine
had to deal with a
conqueror and that love
resembles war. She did not
surrender, she let herself be
conquered. Had she been
more tender, more
attentive, more loving,
perhaps Bonaparte would
have loved her less.
—IMBERT DE SAINT-AMAND,
QUOTED IN THE EMPRESS
JOSEPHINE: NAPOLEON'S
ENCHANTRESS, PHILIP W.
SERGEANT
Coquettes know how to
please; not how to love,
which is why men love
them so much.
—PIERRE MARIVAUX
69
