86 • The Art of Seduction
of office his political career seemed over. Feeling old and depressed, he
resigned himself to spending his last years with his grandchildren in quiet
retirement.
A few months after Marie's death, Harriman was talked into attending a
Washington party. There he met an old friend, Pamela Churchill, whom he
had known during World War II, in London, where he had been sent as a
personal envoy of President Franklin D. Roosevelt. She was twenty-one at
the time, and was the wife of Winston Churchill's son Randolph. There
had certainly been more beautiful women in the city, but none had been
more pleasant to be around: she was so attentive, listening to his problems,
befriending his daughter (they were the same age), and calming him when-
ever he saw her. Marie had remained in the States, and Randolph was in
the army, so while bombs rained on London Averell and Pamela had begun
an affair. And in the many years since the war, she had kept in touch with
him: he knew about the breakup of her marriage, and about her endless se-
ries of affairs with Europe's wealthiest playboys. Yet he had not seen her
since his return to America, and to his wife. What a strange coincidence to
run into her at this particular moment in his life.
At the party Pamela pulled Harriman out of his shell, laughing at his
jokes and getting him to talk about London in the glory days of the war.
He felt his old power returning—it was as if he were charming her. A few
days later she dropped in on him at one of his weekend homes. Harriman
was one of the wealthiest men in the world, but was no lavish spender; he
and Marie had lived a Spartan life. Pamela made no comment, but when
she invited him to her own home, he could not help but notice the bright-
ness and vibrancy of her life—flowers everywhere, beautiful linens on the
bed, wonderful meals (she seemed to know all of his favorite foods). He
had heard of her reputation as a courtesan and understood the lure of his
wealth, yet being around her was invigorating, and eight weeks after that
party, he married her.
Pamela did not stop there. She persuaded her husband to donate the art
that Marie had collected to the National Gallery. She got him to part with
some of his money—a trust fund for her son Winston, new houses, constant
redecorations. Her approach was subtle and patient; she made him somehow
feel good about giving her what she wanted. Within a few years, hardly any
traces of Marie remained in their life. Harriman spent less time with his
children and grandchildren. He seemed to be going through a second youth.
In Washington, politicians and their wives viewed Pamela with suspi-
cion. They saw through her, and were immune to her charm, or so they
thought. Yet they always came to the frequent parties she hosted, justify-
ing themselves with the thought that powerful people would be there.
Everything at these parties was calibrated to create a relaxed, intimate
atmosphere. No one felt ignored: the least important people would find
themselves talking to Pamela, opening up to that attentive look of hers. She
made them feel powerful and respected. Afterward she would send them a
The Charmer • 87
personal note or gift, often referring to something they had mentioned in
conversation. The wives who had called her a courtesan and worse slowly
changed their minds. The men found her not only beguiling but useful—
her worldwide contacts were invaluable. She could put them in touch with
exactly the right person without them even having to ask. The Harrimans'
parties soon evolved into fundraising events for the Democratic Party. Put
at their ease, feeling elevated by the aristocratic atmosphere Pamela created
and the sense of importance she gave them, visitors would empty their wal-
lets without realizing quite why. This, of course, was exactly what all the
men in her life had done.
In 1986, Averell Harriman died. By then Pamela was powerful and
wealthy enough that she no longer needed a man. In 1993, she was named
the U.S. ambassador to France, and easily transferred her personal and social
charm into the world of political diplomacy. She was still working when
she died, in 1997.
We often recognize Charmers as such; we sense their cleverness. (Surely
Harriman must have realized that his meeting with Pamela Churchill in
1971 was no coincidence.) Nevertheless, we fall under their spell. The rea-
son is simple: the feeling that Charmers provide is so rare as to be worth the
price we pay.
The world is full of self-absorbed people. In their presence, we know that
everything in our relationship with them is directed toward themselves—
their insecurities, their neediness, their hunger for attention. That rein-
forces our own egocentric tendencies; we protectively close ourselves up. It
is a syndrome that only makes us the more helpless with Charmers. First,
they don't talk much about themselves, which heightens their mystery and
disguises their limitations. Second, they seem to be interested in us, and
their interest is so delightfully focused that we relax and open up to them.
Finally, Charmers are pleasant to be around. They have none of most peo-
ple's ugly qualities—nagging, complaining, self-assertion. They seem to
know what pleases. Theirs is a diffused warmth; union without sex. (You
may think a geisha is sexual as well as charming; her power, however, lies
not in the sexual favors she provides but in her rare self-effacing attentive-
ness.) Inevitably, we become addicted, and dependent. And dependence is
the source of the Charmer's power.
People who are physically beautiful, and who play on their beauty to
create a sexually charged presence, have little power in the end; the bloom
of youth fades, there is always someone younger and more beautiful, and
in any case people tire of beauty without social grace. But they never tire
of feeling their self-worth validated. Learn the power you can wield by
making the other person feel like the star. The key is to diffuse your sexual
presence: create a vaguer, more beguiling sense of excitement through a
generalized flirtation, a socialized sexuality that is constant, addictive, and
never totally satisfied.
