262 • The Art of Seduction
the same words over and over, preferably a word with emotional content:
"taxes," "liberals," "bigots." The effect is mesmerizing—ideas can be per-
manently implanted in people's unconscious simply by being repeated often
enough. Affirmation is simply the making of strong positive statements,
like the hypnotist's commands. Seductive language should have a kind of
boldness, which will cover up a multitude of sins. Your audience will be so
caught up in your bold language that they won't have time to reflect on
whether or not it is true. Never say "I don't think the other side made a
wise decision"; say "We deserve better," or "They have made a mess of
things." Affirmative language is active language, full of verbs, imperatives,
and short sentences. Cut out "I believe," "Perhaps," "In my opinion." Head
straight for the heart.
You are learning to speak a different kind of language. Most people
employ symbolic language—their words stand for something real, the feel-
ings, ideas, and beliefs they really have. Or they stand for concrete things in
the real world. (The origin of the word "symbolic" lies in a Greek word
meaning "to bring things together"—in this case, a word and something
real.) As a seducer you are using the opposite: diabolic language. Your words
do not stand for anything real; their sound, and the feelings they evoke, are
more important than what they are supposed to stand for. (The word "dia-
bolic" ultimately means to separate, to throw things apart—here, words and
reality.) The more you make people focus on your sweet-sounding lan-
guage, and on the illusions and fantasies it conjures, the more you diminish
their contact with reality. You lead them into the clouds, where it is hard to
distinguish truth from untruth, real from unreal. Keep your words vague
and ambiguous, so people are never quite sure what you mean. Envelop
them in demonic, diabolical language and they will not be able to focus on
your maneuvers, on the possible consequences of your seduction. And the
more they lose themselves in illusion, the easier it will be to lead them
astray and seduce them.
Symbol: The Clouds. In the clouds it is hard to see
the exact forms of things. Everything seems vague;
the imagination runs wild, seeing things that are
not there. Your words must lift people into
the clouds, where it is easy for them
to lose their way.
Use the Demonic Power of Words to Sow Confusion • 263
Reversal
Do not confuse flowery language with seduction: in using flowery lan-
guage you run the risk of wearing on people's nerves, of seeming
pretentious. Excess verbiage is a sign of selfishness, of your inability to rein
in your natural tendencies. Often with language, less is more; the elusive,
vague, ambiguous phrase leaves the listener more room for imagination
than does a sentence full of bombast and self-indulgence.
You must always think first of your targets, and of what will be pleasant
to their ears. There will be many times when silence is best. What you do
not say can be suggestive and eloquent, making you seem mysterious. In
the eleventh-century Japanese court diary The Pillow Book of Sei Shonagon,
the counselor Yoshichika is intrigued by a lady he sees in a carriage, silent
and beautiful. He sends her a note, and she sends one back; he is the only
one to read it, but by his reaction everyone can tell it is in bad taste, or
badly written. It spoils the effect of her beauty. Shonagon writes, "I have
heard people suggest that no reply at all is better than a bad one." If you are
not eloquent, if you cannot master seductive language, at least learn to curb
your tongue—use silence to cultivate an enigmatic presence.
Finally, seduction has a pace and rhythm. In phase one, you are cautious
and indirect. It is often best to disguise your intentions, to put your target at
ease with deliberately neutral words. Your conversation should be harmless,
even a bit bland. In this second phase, you turn more to the attack; this is
the time for seductive language. Now when you envelop them in your se-
ductive words and letters, it comes as a pleasant surprise. It gives them the
immensely pleasing feeling that they are the ones to suddenly inspire you
with such poetry and intoxicating words.
