
Seductive Oratory
On May 13, 1958, right-wing Frenchmen and their sympathizers in the
army seized control of Algeria, which was then a French colony.
They had been afraid that France's socialist government would grant Alge-
ria its independence. Now, with Algeria under their control, they threat-
ened to take over all of France. Civil war seemed imminent.
At this dire moment all eyes turned to General Charles de Gaulle, the
World War II hero who had played a crucial role in liberating France from
the Nazis. For the last ten years de Gaulle had stayed away from politics, dis-
gusted with the infighting among the various parties. He remained very
popular, and was generally seen as the one man who could unite the country,
but he was also a conservative, and the right-wingers felt certain that if he
came to power he would support their cause. Days after the May 13 coup,
the French government—the Fourth Republic—collapsed, and the parlia-
ment called on de Gaulle to help form a new government, the Fifth Repub-
lic. He asked for and was granted full powers for four months. On June 4,
days after becoming the head of government, de Gaulle flew to Algeria.
The French colonials were ecstatic. It was their coup that had indirectly
brought de Gaulle to power; surely, they imagined, he was coming to thank
them, and to reassure them that Algeria would remain French. When he
arrived in Algiers, thousands of people filled the city's main plaza. The
mood was extremely festive—there were banners, music, and endless chants
of "Algérie française," the French-colonial slogan. Suddenly de Gaulle ap-
peared on a balcony overlooking the plaza. The crowd went wild. The
general, an extremely tall man, raised his arms above his head, and the
chanting doubled in volume. The crowd was begging him to join in. In-
stead he lowered his arms until silence fell, then opened them wide, and
slowly intoned, in his deep voice, "Je vous ai compris"—I have understood
you. There was a moment of quiet, and then, as his words sank in, a deaf-
ening roar: he understood them. That was all they needed to hear.
De Gaulle proceeded to talk of the greatness of France. More cheers.
He promised there would be new elections, and "with those elected repre-
sentatives we will see how to do the rest." Yes, a new government, just what
the crowd wanted—more cheers. He would "find the place for Algeria" in
the French "ensemble." There must be "total discipline, without qualifica-
tion and without conditions"—who could argue with that? He closed with
a loud call: "Vive la République! Vive la France!" the emotional slogan thatAfter Operation Sedition,
we are being treated to
Operation Seduction.
—MAURICE KRIEGEL-
VALRIMONT ON CHARLES DE
GAULLE, SHORTLY AFTER THE
GENERAL ASSUMED POWER
My mistress staged a lock-
out. . . . \ I went back to
verses and compliments, \
My natural weapons. Soft
words \ Remove harsh
door-chains. There's magic
in poetry, its power \ Can
pull down the bloody
moon, \ Turn bach the
sun, make serpents burst
asunder \ Or rivers flow
upstream. \ Doors are no
match for such
spellbinding, the toughest \
Locks can be opeu-sesamed
by its charms. \ But epic's a
dead loss for me. I'll get
nowhere with swift-footed \
Achilles, or with either of
Atreus' sons. \ Old what's-
his-name wasting twenty
years on war and travel, \
Poor Hector dragged in the
dust— \ No good. But
lavish fine words on some
young girl's profile \ And
sooner or later shell tender
herself as the fee, \ An
ample reward for your
253
