78 • The Art of Seduction
Dangers
Coquettes face an obvious danger: they play with volatile emotions.
Every time the pendulum swings, love shifts to hate. So they must or-
chestrate everything carefully. Their absences cannot be too long, their
bouts of anger must be quickly followed by smiles. Coquettes can keep
their victims emotionally entrapped for a long time, but over months or
years the dynamic can begin to prove tiresome. Jiang Qing, later known as
Madame Mao, used coquettish skills to capture the heart of Mao Tse-tung,
but after ten years the quarreling, the tears and the coolness became in-
tensely irritating, and once irritation proved stronger than love, Mao was
able to detach. Josephine, a more brilliant Coquette, was able to adapt, by
spending a whole year without playing coy or withdrawing from Napoleon.
Timing is everything. On the other hand, though, the Coquette stirs up
powerful emotions, and breakups often prove temporary. The Coquette is
addictive: after the failure of the social plan Mao called the Great Leap For-
ward, Madame Mao was able to reestablish her power over her devastated
husband.
The Cold Coquette can stimulate a particularly deep hatred. Valerie
Solanas was a young woman who fell under Andy Warhol's spell. She had
written a play that amused him, and she was given the impression he might
turn it into a film. She imagined becoming a celebrity. She also got in-
volved in the feminist movement, and when, in June 1968, it dawned on
her that Warhol was toying with her, she directed her growing rage at men
on him and shot him three times, nearly killing him. Cold Coquettes may
stimulate feelings that are not so much erotic as intellectual, less passion and
more fascination. The hatred they can stir up is all the more insidious and
dangerous, for it may not be counterbalanced by a deep love. They must
realize the limits of the game, and the disturbing effects they can have on
less stable people.
Charm is seduction without sex. Charmers are consummate manipulators,
masking their cleverness by creating a mood of pleasure and comfort. Their
method is simple: they deflect attention from themselves and focus it on their
target. They understand your spirit, feel your pain, adapt to your moods.
In the presence of a Charmer you feel better about yourself. Charmers
do not argue or fight, complain, or pester—what could be more se-
ductive? By drawing you in with their indulgence they make
you dependent on them, and their power grows. Learn to
cast the Charmer's spell by aiming at people's
primary weaknesses: vanity and
self-esteem.
