84 • The Art of Seduction
taste. To please her, Disraeli was advised, he should curb his natural ele-
gance; but he disregarded what everyone had told him and appeared before
her as a gallant prince, falling to one knee, taking her hand, and kissing it,
saying, "I plight my troth to the kindest of mistresses." Disraeli pledged that
his work now was to realize Victoria's dreams. He praised her qualities so
fulsomely that she blushed; yet strangely enough, she did not find him
comical or offensive, but came out of the encounter smiling. Perhaps she
should give this strange man a chance, she thought, and she waited to see
what he would do next.
Victoria soon began receiving reports from Disraeli—on parliamentary
debates, policy issues, and so forth—that were unlike anything other minis-
ters had written. Addressing her as the "Faery Queen," and giving the
monarchy's various enemies all kinds of villainous code names, he filled his
notes with gossip. In a note about a new cabinet member, Disraeli wrote,
"He is more than six feet four inches in stature; like St. Peter's at Rome no
one is at first aware of his dimensions. But he has the sagacity of the ele-
phant as well as its form." The minister's blithe, informal spirit bordered on
disrespect, but the queen was enchanted. She read his reports voraciously,
and almost without her realizing it, her interest in politics was rekindled.
At the start of their relationship, Disraeli sent the queen all of his novels
as a gift. She in return presented him with the one book she had written,
Journal of Our Life in the Highlands. From then on he would toss out in his
letters and conversations with her the phrase, "We authors." The queen
would beam with pride. She would overhear him praising her to others—
her ideas, common sense, and feminine instincts, he said, made her the
equal of Elizabeth I. He rarely disagreed with her. At meetings with other
ministers, he would suddenly turn and ask her for advice. In 1875, when
Disraeli managed to finagle the purchase of the Suez Canal from the debt-
ridden khedive of Egypt, he presented his accomplishment to the queen as
if it were a realization of her own ideas about expanding the British Em-
pire. She did not realize the cause, but her confidence was growing by leaps
and bounds.
Victoria once sent flowers to her prime minister. He later returned the
favor, sending primroses, a flower so ordinary that some recipients might
have been insulted; but his gift came with a note: "Of all the flowers, the
one that retains its beauty longest, is sweet primrose." Disraeli was envelop-
ing Victoria in a fantasy atmosphere in which everything was a metaphor,
and the simplicity of the flower of course symbolized the queen—and also
the relationship between the two leaders. Victoria fell for the bait; prim-
roses were soon her favorite flower. In fact everything Disraeli did now met
with her approval. She allowed him to sit in her presence, an unheard-
of privilege. The two began to exchange valentines every February. The
queen would ask people what Disraeli had said at a party; when he paid a
little too much attention to Empress Augusta of Germany, she grew jeal-
ous. The courtiers wondered what had happened to the stubborn, formal
woman they had known—she was acting like an infatuated girl.Wax, a substance naturally
hard and brittle, can be
made soft by the
application of a little
warmth, so that it will take
any shape you please. In
the same way, by being
polite and friendly, you can
make people pliable and
obliging, even though they
are apt to be crabbed and
malevolent. Hence
politeness is to human
nature what warmth is to
wax.
—ARTHUR SCHOPENHAUER,
COUNSELS AND MAXIMS,
TRANSLATED BY T. BAILEY
SAUNDERS
Never explain. Never
complain.
—BENJAMIN DISRAELI
The Charmer • 85
In 1876, Disraeli steered through Parliament a bill declaring Queen
Victoria a "Queen-Empress." The queen was beside herself with joy. Out
of gratitude and certainly love, she elevated this Jewish dandy and novelist
to the peerage, making him Earl of Beaconsfield, the realization of a life-
long dream.
Disraeli knew how deceptive appearances can be: people were always judg-
ing him by his face and by his clothes, and he had learned never to do
the same to them. So he was not deceived by Queen Victoria's dour, sober
exterior. Beneath it, he sensed, was a woman who yearned for a man to
appeal to her feminine side, a woman who was affectionate, warm, even
sexual. The extent to which this side of Victoria had been repressed merely
revealed the strength of the feelings he would stir once he melted her
reserve.
Disraeli's approach was to appeal to two aspects of Victoria's personality
that other people had squashed: her confidence and her sexuality. He was a
master at flattering a person's ego. As one English princess remarked,
"When I left the dining room after sitting next to Mr. Gladstone, I thought
he was the cleverest man in England. But after sitting next to Mr. Disraeli, I
thought I was the cleverest woman in England." Disraeli worked his magic
with a delicate touch, insinuating an atmosphere of amusement and relax-
ation, particularly in relation to politics. Once the queen's guard was down,
he made that mood a little warmer, a little more suggestive, subtly sexual—
though of course without overt flirtation. Disraeli made Victoria feel desir-
able as a woman and gifted as a monarch. How could she resist? How could
she deny him anything?
Our personalities are often molded by how we are treated: if a parent or
spouse is defensive or argumentative in dealing with us, we tend to respond
the same way. Never mistake people's exterior characteristics for reality, for
the character they show on the surface may be merely a reflection of the
people with whom they have been most in contact, or a front disguising
its own opposite. A gruff exterior may hide a person dying for warmth; a
repressed, sober-looking type may actually be struggling to conceal uncon-
trollable emotions. That is the key to charm—feeding what has been
repressed or denied.
By indulging the queen, by making himself a source of pleasure, Dis-
raeli was able to soften a woman who had grown hard and cantankerous.
Indulgence is a powerful tool of seduction: it is hard to be angry or defen-
sive with someone who seems to agree with your opinions and tastes.
Charmers may appear to be weaker than their targets but in the end they
are the more powerful side because they have stolen the ability to resist.
2. In 1971, the American financier and Democratic Party power-player
Averell Harriman saw his life drawing to a close. He was seventy-nine, his
wife of many years, Marie, had just died, and with the Democrats out
