190 • The Art of Seduction
plauding far too loudly at his entrance. Wilde was not the least bit flustered.
The audience laughed hysterically at his improvised comments, and when
the boys heckled him he kept his dignity, betraying no anger at all. Once
again, the contrast between his manner and his physical appearance made
him seem rather extraordinary. Many were deeply impressed, and Wilde
was well on his way to becoming a sensation.
The short lecture tour turned into a cross-country affair. In San Fran-
cisco, this visiting lecturer on art and aesthetics proved able to drink every-
one under the table and play poker, which made him the hit of the season.
On his way back from the West Coast, Wilde was to make stops in Colo-
rado, and was warned that if the pretty-boy poet dared to show up in the
mining town of Leadville, he would be hung from the highest tree. It was
an invitation Wilde could not refuse. Arriving in Leadville, he ignored the
hecklers and nasty looks; he toured the mines, drank and played cards, then
lectured on Botticelli and Cellini in the saloons. Like everyone else, the
miners fell under his spell, even naming a mine after him. One cowboy was
heard to say, "That fellow is some art guy, but he can drink any of us under
the table and afterwards carry us home two at a time."
Interpretation. In a fable he improvised at dinner once, Oscar Wilde talked
about some steel filings that had a sudden desire to visit a nearby magnet.
As they talked to each other about this, they found themselves moving
closer to the magnet without realizing how or why. Finally they were swept
in one mass to the magnet's side. "Then the magnet smiled—for the steel
filings had no doubt at all but that they were paying that visit of their
own free will." Such was the effect that Wilde himself had on everyone
around him.
Wilde's attractiveness was more than just a by-product of his character,
it was quite calculated. An adorer of paradox, he consciously played up his
own weirdness and ambiguity, the contrast between his mannered appear-
ance and his witty, effortless performance. Naturally warm and sponta-
neous, he constructed an image that ran counter to his nature. People were
repelled, confused, intrigued, and finally drawn to this man who seemed
impossible to figure out.
Paradox is seductive because it plays with meaning. We are secretly op-
pressed by the rationality in our lives, where everything is meant to mean
something; seduction, by contrast, thrives on ambiguity, on mixed signals,
on anything that eludes interpretation. Most people are painfully obvious.
If their character is showy, we may be momentarily attracted, but the at-
traction wears off; there is no depth, no contrary motion, to pull us in. The
key to both attracting and holding attention is to radiate mystery. And no
one is naturally mysterious, at least not for long; mystery is something you
have to work at, a ploy on your part, and something that must be used early
on in the seduction. Let one part of your character show, so everyone no-
tices it. (In the example of Wilde, this was the mannered affectation con-insensibly drawing nearer
to their neighbor; and the
more they talked, the more
they felt the impulse
growing stronger, till the
more impatient ones
declared that they would go
that day, whatever the rest
did. Some were heard to
say that it was their duty
to visit the magnet, and
they ought to have gone
long ago. And, while they
talked, they moved always
nearer and nearer, without
realizing that they had
moved. Then, at last, the
impatient ones prevailed,
and, with one irresistible
impulse, the whole body
cried out, "There is no use
waiting. We will go today.
We will go now. We will
go at once." And then in
one unanimous mass they
swept along, and in
another moment were
clinging fast to the magnet
on every side. Then the
magnet smiled—for the
steel filings had no doubt
at all but that they were
paying that visit of their
own free will.
—OSCAR WILDE, AS QUOTED BY
RICHARD LE GALLIENNE IN
HESKETH PEARSON, OSCAR
WILDE: HIS LIFE AND WIT
Now that the bohort
[impromptu joust] was over
and the knights were
dispersing and each making
his way to where his
thoughts inclined him, it
chanced that Rivalin was
heading for where lovely
Blancheflor was sitting.
Seeing this, he galloped up
to her and looking her in
the eyes saluted her most
pleasantly. • "God save
you, lovely woman!" •
"Thank you," said the
girl, and continued very
bashfully, "may God
Almighty, who makes all
hearts glad, gladden your
heart and mind! And my
Send Mixed Signals • 191
veyed by his clothes and poses.) But also send out a mixed signal—some
sign that you are not what you seem, a paradox. Do not worry if this
underquality is a negative one, like danger, cruelty, or amorality; people
will be drawn to the enigma anyway, and pure goodness is rarely seductive.
Paradox with him was only truth standing on its head to
attract attention.
—RICHARD LE GALLIENNE, ON HIS FRIEND OSCAR WILDE
Keys to Seduction
Nothing can proceed in seduction unless you can attract and hold your
victim's attention, your physical presence becoming a haunting men-
tal presence. It is actually quite easy to create that first stir—an alluring style
of dress, a suggestive glance, something extreme about you. But what hap-
pens next? Our minds are barraged with images—not just from media but
from the disorder of daily life. And many of these images are quite striking.
You become just one more thing screaming for attention; your attractive-
ness will pass unless you spark the more enduring kind of spell that makes
people think of you in your absence. That means engaging their imagina-
tions, making them think there is more to you than what they see. Once
they start embellishing your image with their fantasies, they are hooked.
This must, however, be done early on, before your targets know too
much and their impressions of you are set. It should occur the moment
they lay eyes on you. By sending mixed signals in that first encounter, you
create a little surprise, a little tension: you seem to be one thing (innocent,
brash, intellectual, witty), but you also throw them a glimpse of something
else (devilish, shy, spontaneous, sad). Keep things subtle: if the second
quality is too strong, you will seem schizophrenic. But make them wonder
why you might be shy or sad underneath your brash intellectual wit, and
you will have their attention. Give them an ambiguity that lets them see
what they want to see, capture their imagination with little voyeuristic
glimpses into your dark soul.
The Greek philosopher Socrates was one of history's greatest seducers;
the young men who followed him as students were not just fascinated by
his ideas, they fell in love with him. One such youth was Alcibiades, the
notorious playboy who became a powerful political figure near the end of
the fifth century B.C. In Plato's Symposium, Alcibiades describes Socrates's
seductive powers by comparing him to the little figures of Silenus that were
made back then. In Greek myth, Silenus was quite ugly, but also a wise
prophet. Accordingly the statues of Silenus were hollow, and when you
took them apart, you would find little figures of gods inside them—the in-
ner truth and beauty under the unappealing exterior. And so, for Alci-
biades, it was the same with Socrates, who was so ugly as to be repellent but
whose face radiated inner beauty and contentment. The effect was confus-grateful thanks to you!—
yet not forgetting a bone I
have to pick with you." •
"Ah, sweet woman, what
have I done?" was
courteous Rivalin's reply. •
"You have annoyed me
through a friend of mine,
the best I ever had. " •
"Good heavens," thought
he, "what does this mean?
What have I done to
displease her? What does
she say I have done?" and
he imagined that
unwittingly he must have
injured a kinsman of hers
some time at their knightly
sports and that was why
she was vexed with him.
But no, the friend she
referred to was her heart, in
which he made her suffer:
that was the friend she
spoke of But he knew
nothing of that. • "Lovely
woman," he said with all
his accustomed charm, "I
do not want you to be
angry with me or bear me
any ill will. So, if what
you tell me is true,
pronounce sentence on me
yourself: I will do whatever
you command." • "I do
not hate you overmuch for
what has happened," was
the sweet girl's answer,
"nor do I love you for it.
But to see what amends
you will make for the
wrong you have done me, I
shall test you another
time." • And so he bowed
as if to go, and she, lovely
girl, sighed at him most
secretly and said with
tender feeling: • "Ah, dear
friend, God bless you!"
From this time on the
thoughts of each ran on the
other. • Rivalin turned
away, pondering many
things. He pondered from
many sides why
Blancheflor should be
vexed, and what lay
behind it all. He
considered her greeting, her
