Preface
Thousands of years ago, power was mostly gained through physical vio-
lence and maintained with brute strength. There was little need for
subtlety—a king or emperor had to be merciless. Only a select few had
power, but no one suffered under this scheme of things more than women.
They had no way to compete, no weapon at their disposal that could make
a man do what they wanted—politically, socially, or even in the home.
Of course men had one weakness: their insatiable desire for sex. A
woman could always toy with this desire, but once she gave in to sex the
man was back in control; and if she withheld sex, he could simply look
elsewhere—or exert force. What good was a power that was so temporary
and frail? Yet women had no choice but to submit to this condition. There
were some, though, whose hunger for power was too great, and who, over
the years, through much cleverness and creativity, invented a way of turn-
ing the dynamic around, creating a more lasting and effective form of
power.
These women—among them Bathsheba, from the Old Testament;
Helen of Troy; the Chinese siren Hsi Shi; and the greatest of them all,
Cleopatra—invented seduction. First they would draw a man in with an al-
luring appearance, designing their makeup and adornment to fashion the
image of a goddess come to life. By showing only glimpses of flesh, they
would tease a man's imagination, stimulating the desire not just for sex but
for something greater: the chance to possess a fantasy figure. Once they had
their victims' interest, these women would lure them away from the mascu-
line world of war and politics and get them to spend time in the feminine
world—a world of luxury, spectacle, and pleasure. They might also lead
them astray literally, taking them on a journey, as Cleopatra lured Julius
Caesar on a trip down the Nile. Men would grow hooked on these refined,
sensual pleasures—they would fall in love. But then, invariably, the women
would turn cold and indifferent, confusing their victims. Just when the
men wanted more, they found their pleasures withdrawn. They would be
forced into pursuit, trying anything to win back the favors they once had
tasted and growing weak and emotional in the process. Men who had
physical force and all the social power—men like King David, the Trojan
Paris, Julius Caesar, Mark Antony, King Fu Chai—would find themselves
becoming the slave of a woman.
In the face of violence and brutality, these women made seduction aOppression and scorn,
thus, were and must have
been generally the share of
women in emerging
societies; this state lasted in
all its force until centuries
of experience taught them
to substitute skill for force.
Women at last sensed that,
since they were weaker,
their only resource was to
seduce; they understood
that if they were dependent
on men through force, men
could become dependent on
them through pleasure.
More unhappy than men,
they must have thought
and reflected earlier than
did men; they were the first
to know that pleasure was
always beneath the idea
that one formed of it, and
that the imagination went
farther than nature. Once
these basic truths were
known, they learned first
to veil their charms in order
to awaken curiosity; they
practiced the difficult art of
refusing even as they
wished to consent; from
that moment on, they
knew how to set men's
imagination afire, they
knew how to arouse and
direct desires as they
pleased: thus did beauty
and love come into being;
now the lot of women
xx • Preface
sophisticated art, the ultimate form of power and persuasion. They learned
to work on the mind first, stimulating fantasies, keeping a man wanting
more, creating patterns of hope and despair—the essence of seduction.
Their power was not physical but psychological, not forceful but indirect
and cunning. These first great seductresses were like military generals plan-
ning the destruction of an enemy, and indeed early accounts of seduction
often compare it to battle, the feminine version of warfare. For Cleopatra,
it was a means of consolidating an empire. In seduction, the woman was no
longer a passive sex object; she had become an active agent, a figure of
power.
With a few exceptions—the Latin poet Ovid, the medieval
troubadours—men did not much concern themselves with such a frivolous
art as seduction. Then, in the seventeenth century came a great change:
men grew interested in seduction as a way to overcome a young woman's
resistance to sex. History's first great male seducers—the Duke de Lauzun,
the different Spaniards who inspired the Don Juan legend—began to adopt
the methods traditionally employed by women. They learned to dazzle
with their appearance (often androgynous in nature), to stimulate the
imagination, to play the coquette. They also added a new, masculine ele-
ment to the game: seductive language, for they had discovered a woman's
weakness for soft words. These two forms of seduction—the feminine use
of appearances and the masculine use of language—would often cross
gender lines: Casanova would dazzle a woman with his clothes; Ninon
de l'Enclos would charm a man with her words.
At the same time that men were developing their version of seduction,
others began to adapt the art for social purposes. As Europe's feudal system
of government faded into the past, courtiers needed to get their way in
court without the use of force. They learned the power to be gained by se-
ducing their superiors and competitors through psychological games, soft
words, a little coquetry. As culture became democratized, actors, dandies,
and artists came to use the tactics of seduction as a way to charm and win
over their audience and social milieu. In the nineteenth century another
great change occurred: politicians like Napoleon consciously saw them-
selves as seducers, on a grand scale. These men depended on the art of se-
ductive oratory, but they also mastered what had once been feminine
strategies: staging vast spectacles, using theatrical devices, creating a charged
physical presence. All this, they learned, was the essence of charisma—and
remains so today. By seducing the masses they could accumulate immense
power without the use of force.
Today we have reached the ultimate point in the evolution of seduc-
tion. Now more than ever, force or brutality of any kind is discouraged. All
areas of social life require the ability to persuade people in a way that does
not offend or impose itself. Forms of seduction can be found everywhere,
blending male and female strategies. Advertisements insinuate, the soft sell
dominates. If we are to change people's opinions—and affecting opinion is
basic to seduction—we must act in subtle, subliminal ways. Today no politi-became less harsh, not that
they had managed to
liberate themselves entirely
from the state of oppression
to which their weakness
condemned them; but, in
the state of perpetual war
that continues to exist
between women and men,
one has seen them, with
the help of the caresses they
have been able to invent,
combat ceaselessly,
sometimes vanquish, and
often more skillfully take
advantage of the forces
directed against them;
sometimes, too, men have
turned against women
these weapons the women
had forged to combat them,
and their slavery has
become all the harsher
for it.
—CHODERLOS DE LACLOS, ON
THE EDUCATION OF WOMEN,
TRANSLATED BY LYDIA DAVIS, IN
THE LIBERTINE READER,
EDITED BY MICHAEL FEHER
Much more genius is
needed to make love than
to command armies.
—NINON DE L'ENCLOS
Menelaus, if you are really
going to kill her, \ Then
my blessing go with you,
but you must do it now, \
Before her looks so twist
the strings of your heart \
That they turn your mind;
for her eyes are like armies,
\And where her glances
fall, there cities burn, \
Until the dust of their
ashes is blown \ By her
sighs. I know her,
Men elans, \ And so do
you. And all those who
know her suffer.
—HECUBA SPEAKING ABOUT
HELEN OF TROY IN EURIPIDES,
THE TROJAN WOMEN,
TRANSLATED BY NEIL CURRY
