The Dandy • 41
on his overly romantic verse, inspired ideas for new poems. But she was put
off by his childish dependence on her, his weakness. Unable to stand weak-
ness of any kind, she eventually left him. Consumed by her memory, Rilke
long continued to pursue her. In 1926, lying on his deathbed, he begged
his doctors, "Ask Lou what is wrong with me. She is the only one who
knows."
One man wrote of Salomé, "There was something terrifying about her
embrace. Looking at you with her radiant blue eyes, she would say, 'The
reception of the semen is for me the height of ecstasy.' And she had an in-
satiable appetite for it. She was completely amoral ... a vampire." The
Swedish psychotherapist Poul Bjerre, one of her later conquests, wrote, "I
think Nietzsche was right when he said that Lou was a thoroughly evil
woman. Evil however in the Goethean sense: evil that produces good. . . .
She may have destroyed lives and marriages but her presence was exciting."
The two emotions that almost every male felt in the presence of Lou
Andreas-Salomé were confusion and excitement—the two prerequisite
feelings for any successful seduction. People were intoxicated by her strange
mix of the masculine and the feminine; she was beautiful, with a radiant
smile and a graceful, flirtatious manner, but her independence and her in-
tensely analytical nature made her seem oddly male. This ambiguity was
expressed in her eyes, which were both coquettish and probing. It was con-
fusion that kept men interested and curious: no other woman was like this.
They wanted to know more. The excitement stemmed from her ability to
stir up repressed desires. She was a complete nonconformist, and to be in-
volved with her was to break all kinds of taboos. Her masculinity made the
relationship seem vaguely homosexual; her slightly cruel, slightly domi-
neering streak could stir up masochistic yearnings, as it did in Nietzsche.
Salomé radiated a forbidden sexuality. Her powerful effect on men—the
lifelong infatuations, the suicides (there were several), the periods of intense
creativity, the descriptions of her as a vampire or a devil—attest to the ob-
scure depths of the psyche that she was able to reach and disturb.
The Masculine Dandy succeeds by reversing the normal pattern of
male superiority in matters of love and seduction. A man's apparent inde-
pendence, his capacity for detachment, often seems to give him the upper
hand in the dynamic between men and women. A purely feminine woman
will arouse desire, but is always vulnerable to the man's capricious loss of
interest; a purely masculine woman, on the other hand, will not arouse that
interest at all. Follow the path of the Masculine Dandy, however, and you
neutralize all a man's powers. Never give completely of yourself; while you
are passionate and sexual, always retain an air of independence and self-
possession. You might move on to the next man, or so he will think. You
have other, more important matters to concern yourself with, such as your
work. Men do not know how to fight women who use their own weapons
against them; they are intrigued, aroused, and disarmed. Few men can resist
the taboo pleasures offered up to them by the Masculine Dandy.ancestral device, but with
the figure of Eros armed
with a thunderbolt. The
leading men of Athens
watched all this with
disgust and indignation
and they were deeply
disturbed by his
contemptuous and lawless
behaviour, which seemed to
them monstrous and
suggested the habits of a
tyrant. The people's feelings
towards him have been very
aptly expressed by
Aristophanes in the line:
"They long for him, they
hate him, they cannot do
without him. . . ." • The
fact was that his voluntary
donations, the public shows
he supported, his unrivalled
munificence to the state, the
fame of his ancestry, the
power of his oratory and
his physical strength and
beauty . . . all combined to
make the Athenians forgive
him everything else, and
they were constantly finding
euphemisms for his lapses
and putting them down to
youthful high spirits
and honourable ambition.
—PLUTARCH,"THE LIFE OF
ALCIBIADES," THE RISE AND
FALL OF ATHENS: NINE GREEK
LIVES, TRANSLATED BY IAN
SCOTT-KILVERT
Further light—a whole
flood of it—is thrown
upon this attraction of
the male in petticoats for
the female, in the diary
of the Abbé de Choisy, one
of the most brilliant men-
women of history, of whom
we shall hear a great deal
more later. The abbé, a
churchman of Paris, was a
constant masquerader in
female attire. He lived in
the days of Louis XIV, and
was a great friend of Louis'
brother, also addicted to
women's clothes. A young
48 • The Art of Seduction
The seduction emanating from a person of uncertain or dis-
simulated sex is powerful.
—COLETTE
Keys to the Character
Many of us today imagine that sexual freedom has progressed in recent
years—that everything has changed, for better or worse. This is
mostly an illusion; a reading of history reveals periods of licentiousness
(imperial Rome, late-seventeenth-century England, the "floating world" of
eighteenth-century Japan) far in excess of what we are currently experi-
encing. Gender roles are certainly changing, but they have changed before.
Society is in a state of constant flux, but there is something that does not
change: the vast majority of people conform to whatever is normal for the
time. They play the role allotted to them. Conformity is a constant because
humans are social creatures who are always imitating one another. At cer-
tain points in history it may be fashionable to be different and rebellious,
but if a lot of people are playing that role, there is nothing different or re-
bellious about it.
We should never complain about most people's slavish conformity,
however, for it offers untold possibilities of power and seduction to those
who are up for a few risks. Dandies have existed in all ages and cultures (Al-
cibiades in ancient Greece, Korechika in late-tenth-century Japan), and
wherever they have gone they have thrived on the conformist role playing
of others. The Dandy displays a true and radical difference from other peo-
ple, a difference of appearance and manner. Since most of us are secretly
oppressed by our lack of freedom, we are drawn to those who are more
fluid and flaunt their difference.
Dandies seduce socially as well as sexually; groups form around them,
their style is wildly imitated, an entire court or crowd will fall in love
with them. In adapting the Dandy character for your own purposes, re-
member that the Dandy is by nature a rare and beautiful flower. Be differ-
ent in ways that are both striking and aesthetic, never vulgar; poke fun at
current trends and styles, go in a novel direction, and be supremely uninter-
ested in what anyone else is doing. Most people are insecure; they will
wonder what you are up to, and slowly they will come to admire and imi-
tate you, because you express yourself with total confidence.
The Dandy has traditionally been defined by clothing, and certainly
most Dandies create a unique visual style. Beau Brummel, the most famous
Dandy of all, would spend hours on his toilette, particularly the inimitably
styled knot in his necktie, for which he was famous throughout early-
nineteenth-century England. But a Dandy's style cannot be obvious, for
Dandies are subtle, and never try hard for attention—attention comes to
them. The person whose clothes are flagrantly different has little imagina-
tion or taste. Dandies show their difference in the little touches that markgirl, Mademoiselle
Charlotte, thrown much
into his company, fell
desperately in love with the
abbé, and when the affair
had progressed to a
liaison, the abbé asked her
how she came to be won . . .
• "I stood in no need of
caution as I should have
with a man. I saw nothing
but a beautiful woman,
and why should I be
forbidden to love you?
What advantages a
woman's dress gives you!
The heart of a man is
there, and that makes a
great impression upon us,
and on the other hand, all
the charms of the fair sex
fascinate us, and prevent us
from taking precautions. "
—C.J. BULLIET,
VENUS CASTINA
Beau Brummell was
regarded as unbalanced in
his passion for daily
ablutions. His ritualistic
morning toilet took upward
of five hours, one hour
spent inching himself into
his skin-tight buckskin
breeches, an hour with the
hairdresser and another two
hours tying and "creasing
down" a series of starched
cravats until perfection was
achieved. But first of all
two hours were spent
scrubbing himself with
fetish zeal from head to toe
in milk, water and eau de
Cologne. . . . Beau
Brummell said he used
only the froth of
champagne to polish his
Hessian boots. He had
365 snuff boxes, those
suitable for summer wear
being quite unthinkable in
winter, and the fit of his
gloves was achieved by
entrusting their cut to two
firms—one for the fingers,
the other for the thumbs.
