170 • The Art of Seduction
ther. The conquest of this notoriously virtuous woman would prove his
greatest seduction. His reputation would only be enhanced.
There was an obstacle, though, that seemed to make success almost im-
possible: everyone knew Valmont's reputation, including the Présidente.
She knew how dangerous it was to ever be alone with him, how people
would talk about the least association with him. Valmont did everything
to belie his reputation, even going so far as to attend church services and
seem repentant of his ways. The Présidente noticed, but still kept her dis-
tance. The challenge she presented to Valmont was irresistible, but could he
meet it?
Valmont decided to test the waters. One day he arranged a little walk
with the Présidente and his aunt. He chose a delightful path that they had
never taken before, but at a certain point they reached a little ditch, unsuit-
able for a lady to cross on her own. And yet, Valmont said, the rest of the
walk was too nice for them to turn back, and he gallantly picked up his
aunt in his arms and carried her across the ditch, making the Présidente
laugh uproariously. But then it was her turn, and Valmont purposefully
picked her up a little awkwardly, so that she caught at his arms, and while
he was holding her against him he could feel her heart beating faster, and
saw her blush. His aunt saw this too, and cried out, "The child is afraid!"
But Valmont sensed otherwise. Now he knew that the challenge could be
met, that the Présidente could be won. The seduction could proceed.
Interpretation. Valmont, the Présidente de Tourvel, and the Marquise de
Merteuil are all characters in the eighteenth-century French novel Danger-
ous Liaisons, by Choderlos de Laclos. (The character of Valmont was in-
spired by several real-life libertines of the time, most prominent of all the
Duke de Richelieu.) In the story, Valmont worries that his seductions have
become mechanical; he makes a move, and the woman almost always re-
sponds the same way. But no two seductions should be the same—a differ-
ent target should change the whole dynamic. Valmont's problem is that he
is always seducing the same type—the wrong type. He realizes this when he
meets Madame de Tourvel.
It is not because her husband is a count that he decides to seduce her,
or because she is stylishly dressed, or is desired by other men—the usual
reasons. He chooses her because, in her unconscious way, she has already
seduced him. A bare arm, an unrehearsed laugh, a playful manner—all
these have captured his attention, because none of them is contrived. Once
he falls under her spell, the strength of his desire will make his subsequent
maneuvers seem less calculated; he is apparently unable to help himself.
And his strong emotions will slowly infect her.
Beyond the effect the Présidente has on Valmont, she has other traits
that make her the perfect victim. She is bored, which draws her toward ad-
venture. She is naive, and unable to see through his tricks. Finally, the
Achilles' heel: she believes herself immune to seduction. Almost all of usdown, impossible to
withdraw my glance,
impossible to see, because I
saw far too much. The
only thing I have retained
is that she had on a green
cloak, that is all—one
could call it capturing the
cloud instead of Juno; she
has escaped me . . .and
left only her cloak
behind. . . . The girl made
an impression on me. •
The sixteenth • . . . I feel
no impatience, for she must
live here in the city, and at
this moment that is enough
for me. This possibility is
the condition for the proper
appearance of her image—
everything
will be enjoyed in slow
drafts. . . . • The
nineteenth • Cordelia,
then, is her name!
Cordelia! It is a beautiful
name, and that, too, is
important, since it can
often be very disturbing to
have to name an ugly
name together with the
most tender adjectives.
—SØREN KIERKEGAARD, THE
SEDUCER'S DIARY, TRANSLATED
BY HOWARD V. HONG AND
EDNA H. HONG
Love as understood by
Don Juan is a feeling akin
to a taste for hunting. It is
a craving for an activity
which needs an incessant
diversity of stimuli to
challenge skill.
—STENDHAL, LOVE,
TRANSLATED BY GILBERT AND
SUZANNE SALE
It is not the quality of the
desired object that gives us
pleasure, but rather the
energy of our appetites.
—CHARLES BAUDELAIRE, THE
END OF DON JUAN
Choose the Right Victim • 171
are vulnerable to the attractions of other people, and we take precautions
against unwanted lapses. Madame de Tourvel takes none. Once Valmont
has tested her at the ditch, and has seen she is physically vulnerable, he
knows that eventually she will fall.
Life is short, and should not be wasted pursuing and seducing the
wrong people. The choice of target is critical; it is the set up of the seduc-
tion and it will determine everything else that follows. The perfect victim
does not have certain facial features, or the same taste in music, or similar
goals in life. That is how a banal seducer chooses his or her targets. The
perfect victim is the person who stirs you in a way that cannot be explained
in words, whose effect on you has nothing to do with superficialities. He or
she often has a quality that you yourself lack, and may even secretly envy—
the Présidente, for example, has an innocence that Valmont long ago lost or
never had. There should be a little bit of tension—the victim may fear you
a little, even slightly dislike you. Such tension is full of erotic potential and
will make the seduction much livelier. Be more creative in choosing your
prey and you will be rewarded with a more exciting seduction. Of course,
it means nothing if the potential victim is not open to your influence. Test
the person first. Once you feel that he or she is also vulnerable to you then
the hunting can begin.
It is a stroke of good fortune to find one who is worth se-
ducing. . . . Most people rush ahead, become engaged or do
other stupid things, and in a turn of the hand everything is
over, and they know neither what they have won nor what
they have lost.
—SØREN KIERKEGAARD
Keys to Seduction
Throughout life we find ourselves having to persuade people—to se-
duce them. Some will be relatively open to our influence, if only in
subtle ways, while others seem impervious to our charms. Perhaps we find
this a mystery beyond our control, but that is an ineffective way of dealing
with life. Seducers, whether sexual or social, prefer to pick the odds. As
often as possible they go toward people who betray some vulnerability to
them, and avoid the ones who cannot be moved. To leave people who are
inaccessible to you alone is a wise path; you cannot seduce everyone. On the
other hand, you must actively hunt out the prey that responds the right way.
This will make your seductions that much more pleasurable and satisfying.
How do you recognize your victims? By the way they respond to you.
You should not pay so much attention to their conscious responses—a per-
son who is obviously trying to please or charm you is probably playing to
your vanity, and wants something from you. Instead, pay greater attention
to those responses outside conscious control—a blush, an involuntary mir-The daughter of desire
should strive to have the
following lovers in their
turn, as being mutually
restful to her: a boy who
has been loosed too soon
from the authority and
counsel of his father, an
author enjoying office with
a rather simple-minded
prince, a merchant's son
whose pride is in rivaling
other lovers, an ascetic who
is the slave of love in
secret, a king's son whose
follies are boundless and
who has a taste for rascals,
the countrified son of some
village Brahman, a
married woman's lover, a
singer who has just
pocketed a very large sum
of money, the master of a
caravan but recently come
in. . . .These brief
instructions admit of
infinitely varied
interpretation, dear child,
according to the
circumstance; and it
requires intelligence, insight
and reflection to make the
best of each particular case.
—EASTERN LOVE, VOLUME II:
THE HARLOT'S BREVIARY OF
KSHEMENDRA, TRANSLATED BY
E. POWYS MATHERS
The women who can
be easily won over to
congress: . . . a woman
who looks sideways at
you; . . . a woman who
hates her husband, or who
is hated by him; . . . a
woman who has not had
any children; . . . a
woman who is very fond of
society; a woman who
is apparently very
affectionate toward her
husband; the wife of an
actor; a widow; . . . a
woman fond of
enjoyments; . . . a vain
woman; a woman whose
husband is inferior to her
