Acknowledgments
First, I would like to thank Anna Biller for her countless contributions to
this book: the research, the many discussions, her invaluable help with the
text itself, and, last but not least, her knowledge of the art of seduction, of
which I have been the happy victim on numerous occasions.
I must thank my mother, Laurette, for supporting me so steadfastly
throughout this project and for being my most devoted fan.
I would like to thank Catherine Léouzon, who some years ago intro-
duced me to Les Liaisons Dangereuses and the world of Valmont.
I would like to thank David Frankel, for his deft editing and for his
much-appreciated advice; Molly Stern at Viking Penguin, for overseeing
the project and helping to shape it; Radha Pancham, for keeping it all orga-
nized and being so patient; and Brett Kelly, for moving things along.
With heavy heart I would like to pay tribute to my cat Boris, who for
thirteen years watched over me as I wrote and whose presence is sorely
missed. His successor, Brutus, has proven to be a worthy muse.
Finally, I would like to honor my father. Words cannot express how
much I miss him and how much he has inspired my work.
iX
Contents
Acknowlegments • ix
Preface • xix
Part One
The Seductive Character page 1
The Siren page 5
A man is often secretly oppressed by the role he has to play—by always having to be responsi-
ble, in control, and rational. The Siren is the ultimate male fantasy figure because she offers a
total release from the limitations of his life. In her presence, which is always heightened and
sexually charged, the male feels transported to a realm of pure pleasure. In a world where
women are often too timid to project such an image, learn to take control of the male libido by
embodying his fantasy.
The Rake page 17
A woman never quite feels desired and appreciated enough. She wants attention, but a man is
too often distracted and unresponsive. The Rake is a great female fantasy-figure—when he de-
sires a woman, brief though that moment may be, he will go to the ends of the earth for her.
He may be disloyal, dishonest, and amoral, but that only adds to his appeal. Stir a woman's
repressed longings by adapting the Rake's mix of danger and pleasure.
The Ideal Lover page 29
Most people have dreams in their youth that get shattered or worn down with age. They find
themselves disappointed by people, events, reality, which cannot match their youthful ideals.
Ideal Lovers thrive on people's broken dreams, which become lifelong fantasies. You long for ro-
mance? Adventure? Lofty spiritual communion? The Ideal Lover reflects your fantasy. He or
she is an artist in creating the illusion you require. In a world of disenchantment and baseness,
there is limitless seductive power in following the path of the Ideal Lover.
xi
