302 • The Art of Seduction
Joseph discussed the war with Turkey. Joseph reiterated his concerns. Sud-
denly Potemkin interrupted: "I have 100,000 troops waiting for me to say
'Go!' " At that moment the windows of the palace were flung open, and to
the sounds of booming cannons they saw lines of troops as far as the eye
could see, and a fleet of ships filling the harbor. Awed by the sight, images
of Eastern European cities retaken from the Turks dancing in his mind,
Joseph II finally signed the treaty. Catherine was ecstatic, and her love for
Potemkin reached new heights. He had made her dreams come true.
Catherine never suspected that almost everything she had seen was pure
fakery, perhaps the most elaborate illusion ever conjured up by one man.
Interpretation. In the four years that he had been governor of the Crimea,
Potemkin had accomplished little, for this backwater would take decades to
improve. But in the few months before Catherine's visit he had done the
following: every building that faced the road or the shore was given a fresh
coat of paint; artificial trees were set up to hide unseemly spots in the view;
broken roofs were repaired with flimsy boards painted to look like tile;
everyone the party would see was instructed to wear their best clothes and
look happy; everyone old and infirm was to stay indoors. Floating in their
palaces down the Dnieper, the imperial entourage saw brand-new villages,
but most of the buildings were only facades. The herds of cattle were
shipped from great distances, and were moved at night to fresh fields along
the route. The dancing peasants were trained for the entertainments; after
each one they were loaded into carts and hurriedly transported to a new
downriver location, as were the marching soldiers who seemed to be every-
where. The gardens of the new palaces were filled with transplanted trees
that died a few days later. The palaces themselves were quickly and badly
built, but were so magnificently furnished that no one noticed. One
fortress along the way had been built of sand, and was destroyed a little later
by a thunderstorm.
The cost of this vast illusion had been enormous, and the war with
Turkey would fail, but Potemkin had accomplished his goal. To the obser-
vant, of course, there were signs along the way that all was not as it seemed,
but when the empress herself insisted that everything was real and glori-
ous, the courtiers could only agree. This was the essence of the seduction:
Catherine had wanted so desperately to be seen as a loving and progressive
ruler, one who would defeat the Turks and liberate Europe, that when she
saw signs of change in the Crimea, her mind filled in the picture.
When our emotions are engaged, we often have trouble seeing things as
they are. Feelings of love cloud our vision, making us color events to coin-
cide with our desires. To make people believe in the illusions you create,
you need to feed the emotions over which they have least control. Often
the best way to do this is to ascertain their unsatisfied desires, their wishes
crying out for fulfillment. Perhaps they want to see themselves as noble or
romantic, but life has thwarted them. Perhaps they want an adventure. Ifappears before us in reality,
or when a symbol takes
over the full functions of
the thing it symbolizes,
and so on. It is this factor
which contributes not a
little to the uncanny effect
attaching to magical
practices. The infantile
element in this, which also
dominates the minds of
neurotics, is the
overaccentuation of
psychical reality in
comparison with material
reality—a feature closely
allied to the belief in the
omnipotence of thoughts.
—SIGMUND FREUD,
"THE UNCANNY," IN
PSYCHOLOGICAL WRITINGS
AND LETTERS
Confuse Desire and Reality—The Perfect Illusion • 303
something seems to validate this wish, they become emotional and irra-
tional, almost to the point of hallucination.
Remember to envelop them in your illusion slowly. Potemkin did not
start with grand spectacles, but with simple sights along the way, such as
grazing cattle. Then he brought them on land, heightening the drama, un-
til the calculated climax when the windows were flung open to reveal a
mighty war machine—actually a few thousand men and boats lined up in
such a way as to suggest many more. Like Potemkin, involve the target in
some kind of journey, physical or otherwise. The feeling of a shared adven-
ture is rife with fantasy associations. Make people feel that they are getting
to see and live out something that relates to their deepest yearnings and
they will see happy, prosperous villages where there are only facades.
Here the real journey through Potemkin's fairyland began. It
was like a dream—the waking dream of some magician who
had discovered the secret of materializing his visions. . . .
[Catherine] and her companions had left the world of reality
behind. . . . Their talk was of Iphigenia and the ancient
gods, and Catherine felt that she was both Alexander and
Cleopatra.
—GINA KAUS
Keys to Seduction
The real world can be unforgiving: events occur over which we have lit-
tle control, other people ignore our feelings in their quests to get what
they need, time runs out before we accomplish what we had wanted. If we
ever stopped to look at the present and future in a completely objective
way, we would despair. Fortunately we develop the habit of dreaming early
on. In this other, mental world that we inhabit, the future is full of rosy
possibilities. Perhaps tomorrow we will sell that brilliant idea, or meet the
person who will change our lives. Our culture stimulates these fantasies
with constant images and stories of marvelous occurrences and happy
romances.
The problem is, these images and fantasies exist only in our minds, or
on-screen. They really aren't enough—we crave the real thing, not this
endless daydreaming and titillation. Your task as a seducer is to bring some
flesh and blood into someone's fantasy life by embodying a fantasy figure,
or creating a scenario resembling that person's dreams. No one can resist
the pull of a secret desire that has come to life before their eyes. You must
first choose targets who have some repression or dream unrealized—always
the most likely victims of a seduction. Slowly and gradually, you will build
up the illusion that they are getting to see and feel and live those dreams of
theirs. Once they have this sensation they will lose contact with reality, and
begin to see your fantasy as more real than anything else. And once they
