136 • The Art of Seduction
clothes are tasteless by any standard—and in their actions: they do not
know that it is sometimes better to control oneself and refuse to give in to
one's impulses. Vulgarians will blab, saying anything in public. They have
no sense of timing and are rarely in harmony with your tastes. Indiscretion
is a sure sign of the Vulgarian (talking to others of your affair, for example);
it may seem impulsive, but its real source is their radical selfishness, their in-
ability to see themselves as others see them. More than just avoiding Vul-
garians, you must make yourself their opposite—tact, style, and attention to
detail are all basic requirements of a seducer.
Examples of the Anti-Seducer
1. Claudius, the step-grandson of the great Roman emperor Augustus, was
considered something of an imbecile as a young man, and was treated badly
by almost everyone in his family. His nephew Caligula, who became em-
peror in A.D. 37, made it a sport to torture him, making him run around
the palace at top speed as penance for his stupidity, having soiled sandals
tied to his hands at supper, and so on. As Claudius grew older, he seemed
to become even more slow-witted, and while all of his relatives lived under
the constant threat of assassination, he was left alone. So it came as a great
surprise to everyone, including Claudius himself, that when, in A.D. 41, a
cabal of soldiers assassinated Caligula, they also proclaimed Claudius em-
peror. Having no desire to rule, he delegated most of the governing to
confidantes (a group of freed slaves) and spent his time doing what he loved
best: eating, drinking, gambling, and whoring.
Claudius's wife, Valeria Messalina, was one of the most beautiful
women in Rome. Although he seemed fond of her, Claudius paid her no
attention, and she started to have affairs. At first she was discreet, but over
the years, provoked by her husband's neglect, she became more and more
debauched. She had a room built for her in the palace where she enter-
tained scores of men, doing her best to imitate the most notorious prosti-
tute in Rome, whose name was written on the door. Any man who refused
her advances was put to death. Almost everyone in Rome knew about
these frolics, but Claudius said nothing; he seemed oblivious.
So great was Messalina's passion for her favorite lover, Gaius Silius, that
she decided to marry him, although both of them were married already.
While Claudius was away, they held a wedding ceremony, authorized by a
marriage contract that Claudius himself had been tricked into signing. Af-
ter the ceremony, Gaius moved into the palace. Now the shock and disgust
of the whole city finally forced Claudius into action, and he ordered the
execution of Gaius and of Messalina's other lovers—but not of Messalina
herself. Nevertheless, a gang of soldiers, inflamed by the scandal, hunted
her down and stabbed her to death. When this was reported to the em-
peror, he merely ordered more wine and continued his meal. Several nightsBut I'm not instructing
hillbilly girls from the
Caucasus, \ Or Mysian
river-hoydens—so what
need \ To remind you not
to let your teeth get all
discolored \ Through
neglect, or forget to wash \
Your hands every morning?
You know how to brighten
your complexion \ With
powder, add rouge to a
bloodless face, \ Skillfully
block in the crude outline
of an eyebrow, \ Stick a
patch on one flawless
cheek. \ You don't shrink
from lining your eyes with
dark mascara \ Or a touch
of Cilician saffron. . . . \
But don't let your lover
find all those jars and
bottles \ On your dressing-
table: the best \ Makeup
remains unobtrusive. A
face so thickly plastered \
With pancake it runs
down your sweaty neck \ Is
bound to create repulsion.
And that goo from
unwashed fleeces— \
Athenian maybe, but my
dear, the smell!— \ That's
used for face-cream: avoid
it. When you have
company \ Don't dab stuff
on your pimples, don't start
cleaning your teeth: \ The
result may be attractive, but
the process is
sickening. . . .
—OVID, THE ART OF LOVE,
TRANSLATED BY PETER GREEN
The Anti-Seducer • 137
later, to the amazement of his slaves, he asked why the empress was not
joining him for dinner.
Nothing is more infuriating than being paid no attention. In the process of
seduction, you may have to pull back at times, subjecting your target to
moments of doubt. But prolonged inattention will not only break the se-
ductive spell, it can create hatred. Claudius was an extreme of this behavior.
His insensitivity was created by necessity: in acting like an imbecile, he hid
his ambition and protected himself among dangerous competitors. But the
insensitivity became second nature. Claudius grew slovenly, and no longer
noticed what was going on around him. His inattentiveness had a profound
effect on his wife: How, she wondered, can a man, especially a physically
unappealing man like Claudius, not notice me, or care about my affairs
with other men? But nothing she did seemed to matter to him.
Claudius marks the extreme, but the spectrum of inattention is wide. A
lot of people pay too little attention to the details, the signals another per-
son gives. Their senses are dulled by work, by hardship, by self-absorption.
We often see this turning off the seductive charge between two people, no-
tably between couples who have been together for years. Carried further, it
will stir angry, bitter feelings. Often, the one who has been cheated on by a
partner started the dynamic by patterns of inattention.
2. In 1639, a French army besieged and took possession of the Italian city of
Turin. Two French officers, the Chevalier (later Count) de Grammont and
his friend Matta, decided to turn their attention to the city's beautiful
women. The wives of some of Turin's most illustrious men were more than
susceptible—their husbands were busy, and kept mistresses of their own. The
wives' only requirement was that the suitor play by the rules of gallantry.
The chevalier and Matta were quick to find partners, the chevalier
choosing the beautiful Mademoiselle de Saint-Germain, who was soon to
be betrothed, and Matta offering his services to an older and more experi-
enced woman, Madame de Senantes. The chevalier took to wearing green,
Matta blue, these being their ladies' favorite colors. On the second day of
their courtships the couples visited a palace outside the city. The chevalier
was all charm, making Mademoiselle de Saint-Germain laugh uproariously
at his witticisms, but Matta did not fare so well; he had no patience for this
gallantry business, and when he and Madame de Senantes took a stroll, he
squeezed her hand and boldly declared his affections. The lady of course
was aghast, and when they got back to Turin she left without looking at
him. Unaware that he had offended her, Matta imagined that she was over-
come with emotion, and felt rather pleased with himself. But the Chevalier
de Grammont, wondering why the pair had parted, visited Madame de
Senantes and asked her how it went. She told him the truth—Matta had
dispensed with the formalities and was ready to bed her. The chevalierBut if, like the winter cat
upon the hearth, the lover
clings when he is
dismissed, and cannot bear
to go, certain means must
be taken to make him
understand; and these
should be progressively
ruder and ruder, until they
touch him to the quick of
his flesh. • She should
refuse him the bed, and
jeer at him, and make him
angry; she should stir up
her mother's enmity against
him; she should treat him
with an obvious lack of
candor, and spread herself
in long considerations
about his ruin; his
departure should be openly
anticipated, his tastes and
desires should be thwarted,
his poverty outraged; she
should let him see that she
is in sympathy with
another man, she should
blame him with harsh
words on every occasion;
she should tell lies about
him to her parasites, she
should interrupt his
sentences, and send him on
frequent errands away from
the house. She should seek
occasions of quarrel, and
make him the victim of a
thousand domestic
perfidies; she should rack
her brains to vex him; she
should play with the
glances of another in his
presence, and give herself
up to reprehensible
profligacy before his face;
she should leave the house
as often as possible, and let
it be seen that she has no
real need to do so. All
these means are good for
showing a man the door.
—EASTERN LOVE, VOLUME II:
THE HARLOT'S BREVIARY OF
KSHEMENDRA, TRANSLATED BY
E. POWYS MATHERS
