Create Temptation • 237
need for conquest, to overcome challenge, to taste what no other man had
tasted. Beneath this was a kind of masochism, a pleasure in the pain a
woman could give him. Playing the impossible woman, enticing and then
frustrating him, she offered the ultimate temptation. What will often do the
trick is to give the target the sense that you are a challenge, a prize to be
won. In possessing you they will get what no other has had. They may even
get pain; but pain is close to pleasure, and offers its own temptations.
In the Old Testament we read that "David arose from his couch and
was walking upon the roof of the king's house . . . [and] he saw from the
roof a woman bathing; and the woman was very beautiful." The woman
was Bathsheba. David summoned her, seduced her (supposedly), then pro-
ceeded to get rid of her husband, Uriah, in battle. In fact, however, it was
Bathsheba who had seduced David. She bathed on her roof at an hour
when she knew he would be standing on his balcony. After tempting a man
she knew had a weakness for women, she played the coquette, forcing him
to come after her. This is the opportunity strategy: give someone weak the
chance to have what they lust after by merely placing yourself within their
reach, as if by accident. Temptation is often a matter of timing, of crossing
the path of the weak at the right moment, giving them the opportunity to
surrender.
Bathsheba used her entire body as a lure, but it is often more effective
to use only a part of the body, creating a fetishlike effect. Madame Re-
camier would let you glimpse her body beneath the sheer dresses she wore,
but only briefly, when she took off her overgarment to dance. Men would
leave that evening dreaming of what little they had seen. Empress Josephine
made a point of baring her beautiful arms in public. Give the target only a
part of you to fantasize about, thereby creating a constant temptation in
their mind.tree. Too much riding by
night had left him with
very little strength for the
day's labors, and so there
he lay, with his clothes
ruffled up in front by the
wind, leaving him all
exposed. Finding herself
alone, the lady stood with
her eyes riveted to this
spectacle, and she was
seized by the same craving
to which her young charges
had already succumbed.
So, having roused Masetto,
she led him away to her
room, where she kept him
for several days, thus
provoking bitter complaints
from the nuns over the fact
that the handyman had
suspended work in the
garden. Before sending him
back to his own quarters,
she repeatedly savored the
one pleasure for which she
had always reserved her
most fierce disapproval,
and from then on she
demanded regular
supplementary allocations,
amounting to considerably
more than her fair share.
—GIOVANNI BOCCACCIO,
THE DECAMERON, TRANSLATED
BY G. H. MCWILLIAM
Symbol:
The Apple in the Garden
of Eden. The fruit looks deeply
inviting, and you are not supposed to
eat of it; it is forbidden. But that is pre-
cisely why you think of it day and night.
You see it but cannot have it. And the
only way to get rid of this tempta-
tion is to yield and taste
the fruit.
238 • The Art of Seduction
Reversal
The reverse of temptation is security or satisfaction, and both are fatal to
seduction. If you cannot tempt someone out of their habitual com-
fort, you cannot seduce them. If you satisfy the desire you have awakened,
the seduction is over. There is no reversal to temptation. Although some
stages can be passed over, no seduction can proceed without some form of
temptation, so it is always better to plan it carefully, tailoring it to the weak-
ness and childishness in your particular target.
