Preface • xxi
cal campaign can work without seduction. Since the era of John F.
Kennedy, political figures are required to have a degree of charisma, a fasci-
nating presence to keep their audience's attention, which is half the battle.
The film world and media create a galaxy of seductive stars and images. We
are saturated in the seductive. But even if much has changed in degree and
scope, the essence of seduction is constant: never be forceful or direct; in-
stead, use pleasure as bait, playing on people's emotions, stirring desire and
confusion, inducing psychological surrender. In seduction as it is practiced
today, the methods of Cleopatra still hold.
People are constantly trying to influence us, to tell us what to do, and just
as often we tune them out, resisting their attempts at persuasion. There is a
moment in our lives, however, when we all act differently—when we are in
love. We fall under a kind of spell. Our minds are usually preoccupied with
our own concerns; now they become filled with thoughts of the loved one.
We grow emotional, lose the ability to think straight, act in foolish ways
that we would never do otherwise. If this goes on long enough something
inside us gives way: we surrender to the will of the loved one, and to our
desire to possess them.
Seducers are people who understand the tremendous power contained
in such moments of surrender. They analyze what happens when people
are in love, study the psychological components of the process—what spurs
the imagination, what casts a spell. By instinct and through practice they
master the art of making people fall in love. As the first seductresses knew,
it is much more effective to create love than lust. A person in love is emo-
tional, pliable, and easily misled. (The origin of the word "seduction" is the
Latin for "to lead astray") A person in lust is harder to control and, once
satisfied, may easily leave you. Seducers take their time, create enchantment
and the bonds of love, so that when sex ensues it only further enslaves
the victim. Creating love and enchantment becomes the model for all
seductions—sexual, social, political. A person in love will surrender.
It is pointless to try to argue against such power, to imagine that you are
not interested in it, or that it is evil and ugly. The harder you try to resist
the lure of seduction—as an idea, as a form of power—the more you will
find yourself fascinated. The reason is simple: most of us have known the
power of having someone fall in love with us. Our actions, gestures, the
things we say, all have positive effects on this person; we may not com-
pletely understand what we have done right, but this feeling of power is in-
toxicating. It gives us confidence, which makes us more seductive. We may
also experience this in a social or work setting—one day we are in an ele-
vated mood and people seem more responsive, more charmed by us. These
moments of power are fleeting, but they resonate in the memory with
great intensity. We want them back. Nobody likes to feel awkward or timid
or unable to reach people. The siren call of seduction is irresistible because
power is irresistible, and nothing will bring you more power in the modern
world than the ability to seduce. Repressing the desire to seduce is a kind ofNo man hath it in his
power to over-rule the
deceitfulness of a woman.
—MARGUERITE OF NAVARRE
This important side-track,
by which woman succeeded
in evading man's strength
and establishing herself in
power, has not been given
due consideration by
historians. From the
moment when the woman
detached herself from the
crowd, an individual
finished product, offering
delights which could not be
obtained by force, but only
by flattery .... the reign
of love's priestesses was
inaugurated. It was a
development of far-reaching
importance in the history of
civilization. . . . Only by
the circuitous route of the
art of love could woman
again assert authority, and
this she did by asserting
herself at the very point at
which she would normally
be a slave at the man's
mercy. She had discovered
the might of lust, the secret
of the art of love, the
daemonic power of a
passion artificially aroused
and never satiated. The
force tints unchained was
thenceforth to count among
the most tremendous of the
world's forces and at
moments to have power
even over life and death. . . .
• The deliberate spell-
binding of man's senses
was to have a magical effect
upon him, opening up an
infinitely wider range of
sensation and spurring him
on as if impelled by an
inspired dream.
—ALEXANDER VON GLEICHEN-
RUSSWURM, THE WORLD'S
LURE, TRANSLATED BY HANNAH
WALLER
xxii • Preface
hysterical reaction, revealing your deep-down fascination with the process;
you are only making your desires stronger. Some day they will come to the
surface.
To have such power does not require a total transformation in your
character or any kind of physical improvement in your looks. Seduction is a
game of psychology, not beauty, and it is within the grasp of any person to
become a master at the game. All that is required is that you look at the
world differently, through the eyes of a seducer.
A seducer does not turn the power off and on—every social and per-
sonal interaction is seen as a potential seduction. There is never a moment
to waste. This is so for several reasons. The power seducers have over a man
or woman works in social environments because they have learned how to
tone down the sexual element without getting rid of it. We may think we
see through them, but they are so pleasant to be around anyway that it does
not matter. Trying to divide your life into moments in which you seduce
and others in which you hold back will only confuse and constrain you.
Erotic desire and love lurk beneath the surface of almost every human en-
counter; better to give free rein to your skills than to try to use them only
in the bedroom. (In fact, the seducer sees the world as his or her bedroom.)
This attitude creates great seductive momentum, and with each seduction
you gain experience and practice. One social or sexual seduction makes the
next one easier, your confidence growing and making you more alluring.
People are drawn to you in greater numbers as the seducer's aura descends
upon you.
Seducers have a warrior's outlook on life. They see each person as a
kind of walled castle to which they are laying siege. Seduction is a process
of penetration: initially penetrating the target's mind, their first point of
defense. Once seducers have penetrated the mind, making the target fanta-
size about them, it is easy to lower resistance and create physical surrender.
Seducers do not improvise; they do not leave this process to chance. Like
any good general, they plan and strategize, aiming at the target's particular
weaknesses.
The main obstacle to becoming a seducer is this foolish prejudice we
have of seeing love and romance as some kind of sacred, magical realm
where things just fall into place, if they are meant to. This might seem ro-
mantic and quaint, but it is really just a cover for our laziness. What will se-
duce a person is the effort we expend on their behalf, showing how much
we care, how much they are worth. Leaving things to chance is a recipe for
disaster, and reveals that we do not take love and romance very seriously. It
was the effort Casanova expended, the artfulness he applied to each affair
that made him so devilishly seductive. Falling in love is a matter not of
magic but of psychology. Once you understand your target's psychology,
and strategize to suit it, you will be better able to cast a "magical" spell. A
seducer sees love not as sacred but as warfare, where all is fair.
Seducers are never self-absorbed. Their gaze is directed outward, not
inward. When they meet someone their first move is to get inside that per-The first thing to get in
your head is that every
single \ Girl can be
caught—and that you'll
catch her if \ You set your
toils right. Birds will
sooner fall dumb in \
Springtime, \ Cicadas in
summer, or a hunting-dog \
Turn his back on a hare,
than a lover's bland
inducements \ Can fail
with a woman, Even one
you suppose \ Reluctant
will want it.
—OVID, THE ART OF LOVE,
TRANSLATED BY PETER GREEN
The combination of these
two elements, enchantment
and surrender, is, then,
essential to the love which
we are discussing. . . .
What exists in love is
surrender due to
enchantment.
—JOSÉ ORTEGA Y GASSET, ON
LOVE, TRANSLATED BY TOBY
TALBOT
What is good?—All that
heightens the feeling of
power, the will to power,
power itself in man. •
What is bad?—All that
proceeds from weakness. •
What is happiness?—The
feeling that power
increases—that a resistance
is overcome.
—FRIEDRICH NIETZSCHE, THE
ANTI—CHRIST, TRANSLATED BY
R. J. HOLLINGDALE
