The Charismatic • 101
Fervency. You need to believe in something, and to believe in it strongly
enough for it to animate all your gestures and make your eyes light up. This
cannot be faked. Politicians inevitably lie to the public; what distinguishes
Charismatics is that they believe their own lies, which makes them that
much more believable. A prerequisite for fiery belief is some great cause to
rally around—a crusade. Become the rallying point for people's discontent,
and show that you share none of the doubts that plague normal humans. In
1490, the Florentine Girolamo Savonarola railed at the immorality of the
pope and the Catholic Church. Claiming to be divinely inspired, he be-
came so animated during his sermons that hysteria would sweep the crowd.
Savonarola developed such a following that he briefly took over the city,
until the pope had him captured and burned at the stake. People believed in
him because of the depth of his conviction. His example has more rele-
vance today than ever: people are more and more isolated, and long for
communal experience. Let your own fervent and contagious faith, in virtu-
ally anything, give them something to believe in.
Vulnerability. Charismatics display a need for love and affection. They are
open to their audience, and in fact feed off its energy; the audience in turn
is electrified by the Charismatic, the current increasing as it passes back and
forth. This vulnerable side to charisma softens the self-confident side,
which can seem fanatical and frightening.
Since charisma involves feelings akin to love, you in turn must reveal
your love for your followers. This was a key component to the charisma
that Marilyn Monroe radiated on camera. "I knew I belonged to the Pub-
lic," she wrote in her diary, "and to the world, not because I was talented or
even beautiful but because I had never belonged to anything or anyone else.
The Public was the only family, the only Prince Charming and the only
home I had ever dreamed of." In front of a camera, Monroe suddenly came
to life, flirting with and exciting her unseen public. If the audience does
not sense this quality in you they will turn away from you. On the other
hand, you must never seem manipulative or needy. Imagine your public as a
single person whom you are trying to seduce—nothing is more seductive
to people than the feeling that they are desired.
Adventurousness. Charismatics are unconventional. They have an air of
adventure and risk that attracts the bored. Be brazen and courageous in
your actions—be seen taking risks for the good of others. Napoleon made
sure his soldiers saw him at the cannons in battle. Lenin walked openly on
the streets, despite the death threats he had received. Charismatics thrive in
troubled waters; a crisis situation allows them to flaunt their daring, which
enhances their aura. John F. Kennedy came to life in dealing with the
Cuban missile crisis, Charles de Gaulle when he confronted rebellion in
102 • The Art of Seduction
Algeria. They needed these problems to seem charismatic, and in fact some
have even accused them of stirring up situations (Kennedy through his
brinkmanship style of diplomacy, for instance) that played to their love of
adventure. Show heroism to give yourself a charisma that will last you a
lifetime. Conversely, the slightest sign of cowardice or timidity will ruin
whatever charisma you had.
Magnetism. If any physical attribute is crucial in seduction, it is the eyes.
They reveal excitement, tension, detachment, without a word being spo-
ken. Indirect communication is critical in seduction, and also in charisma.
The demeanor of Charismatics may be poised and calm, but their eyes are
magnetic; they have a piercing gaze that disturbs their targets' emotions,
exerting force without words or action. Fidel Castro's aggressive gaze can
reduce his opponents to silence. When Benito Mussolini was challenged,
he would roll his eyes, showing the whites in a way that frightened people.
President Kusnasosro Sukarno of Indonesia had a gaze that seemed as if it
could have read thoughts. Roosevelt could dilate his pupils at will, making
his stare both hypnotizing and intimidating. The eyes of the Charismatic
never show fear or nerves.
All of these skills are acquirable. Napoleon spent hours in front of a
mirror, modeling his gaze on that of the great contemporary actor Talma.
The key is self-control. The look does not necessarily have to be aggressive;
it can also show contentment. Remember: your eyes can emanate charisma,
but they can also give you away as a faker. Do not leave such an important
attribute to chance. Practice the effect you desire.
Genuine charisma thus means the ability to internally gen-
erate and externally express extreme excitement, an ability
which makes one the object of intense attention and unre-
flective imitation by others.
—LIAH GREENFIELD
Charismatic Types—Historical Examples
The miraculous prophet. In the year 1425, Joan of Arc, a peasant girl
from the French village of Domrémy, had her first vision: "I was in my
thirteenth year when God sent a voice to guide me." The voice was that of
Saint Michael and he came with a message from God: Joan had been cho-
sen to rid France of the English invaders who now ruled most of the
country, and of the resulting chaos and war. She was also to restore the
French crown to the prince—the Dauphin, later Charles VII—who was its
rightful heir. Saint Catherine and Saint Margaret also spoke to Joan. Her
visions were extraordinarily vivid: she saw Saint Michael, touched him,
smelled him.In such conditions, where
half the battle was hand-
to-hand, concentrated into
a small space, the spirit
and example of the leader
counted for much. When
we remember this, it
becomes easier to
understand the astonishing
effect of Joan's presence
upon the French troops.
Her position as a leader
was a unique one. She was
not a professional soldier;
she was not really a soldier
at all; she was not even a
man. She was ignorant of
war. She was a girl dressed
up. But she believed, and
had made others willing to
believe, that she was the
mouthpiece of God. • On
Friday, April 29th, 1429,
the news spread in Orléans
that a force, led by the
Pucelle of Domrémy, was
on its way to the relief of
the city, a piece of news
which, as the chronicler
remarks, comforted them
greatly.
—VITA SACKVILLE-WEST,
SAINT JOAN OF ARC
