106 • The Art of Seduction
The demonic performer. Throughout his childhood Elvis Presley was
thought a strange boy who kept pretty much to himself. In high school in
Memphis, Tennessee, he attracted attention with his pompadoured hair and
sideburns, his pink and black clothing, but people who tried to talk to him
found nothing there—he was either terribly bland or hopelessly shy. At the
high school prom, he was the only boy who didn't dance. He seemed lost
in a private world, in love with the guitar he took everywhere. At the Ellis
Auditorium, at the end of an evening of gospel music or wrestling, the
concessions manager would often find Elvis onstage, miming a perfor-
mance and taking bows before an imaginary audience. Asked to leave, he
would quietly walk away. He was a very polite young man.
In 1953, just out of high school, Elvis recorded his first song, in a local
studio. The record was a test, a chance for him to hear his own voice. A
year later the owner of the studio, Sam Phillips, called him in to record two
blues songs with a couple of professional musicians. They worked for
hours, but nothing seemed to click; Elvis was nervous and inhibited. Then,
near the end of the evening, giddy with exhaustion, he suddenly let loose
and started to jump around like a child, in a moment of complete self-
abandon. The other musicians joined in, the song getting wilder and
wilder. Phillips's eyes lit up—he had something here.
A month later Elvis gave his first public performance, outdoors in a
Memphis park. He was as nervous as he had been at the recording session,
and could only stutter when he had to speak; but once he broke into song,
the words came out. The crowd responded excitedly, rising to peaks at
certain moments. Elvis couldn't figure out why. "I went over to the man-
ager after the song," he later said, "and I asked him what was making the
crowd go nuts. He told me, 'I'm not really sure, but I think that every
time you wiggle your left leg, they start to scream. Whatever it is, just
don't stop.'
A single Elvis recorded in 1954 became a hit. Soon he was in demand.
Going onstage filled him with anxiety and emotion, so much so that he
became a different person, as if possessed. "I've talked to some singers
and they get a little nervous, but they say their nerves kind of settle down
after they get into it. Mine never do. It's sort of this energy . . . something
maybe like sex." Over the next few months he discovered more gestures
and sounds—twitching dance movements, a more tremulous voice—that
made the crowds go crazy, particularly teenage girls. Within a year he had
become the hottest musician in America. His concerts were exercises in
mass hysteria.
Elvis Presley had a dark side, a secret life. (Some have attributed it to the
death, at birth, of his twin brother.) This dark side he deeply repressed as a
young man; it included all kinds of fantasies which he could only give in to
when he was alone, although his unconventional clothing may also have
been a symptom of it. When he performed, though, he was able to let
these demons loose. They came out as a dangerous sexual power. Twitch-By its very nature, the
existence of charismatic
authority is specifically
unstable. The holder may
forego his charisma; he
may feel "forsaken by his
God," as Jesus did on the
cross; he may prove to his
followers that "virtue
is gone out of him." It is
then that his mission
is extinguished, and hope
waits and searches for a
new holder of charisma.
—MAX WEBER, FROM MAX
WEBER: ESSAYS IN SOCIOLOGY,
EDITED BY HANS GERTH AND
C. WRIGHT MILLS
The Charismatic • 107
ing, androgynous, uninhibited, he was a man enacting strange fantasies be-
fore the public. The audience sensed this and was excited by it. It wasn't a
flamboyant style and appearance that gave Elvis charisma, but rather the
electrifying expression of his inner turmoil.
A crowd or group of any sort has a unique energy. Just below the sur-
face is desire, a constant sexual excitement that has to be repressed because
it is socially unacceptable. If you have the ability to rouse those desires, the
crowd will see you as having charisma. The key is learning to access your
own unconscious, as Elvis did when he let go. You are full of an excite-
ment that seems to come from some mysterious inner source. Your unin-
hibitedness will invite other people to open up, sparking a chain reaction:
their excitement in turn will animate you still more. The fantasies you
bring to the surface do not have to be sexual—any social taboo, anything
repressed and yearning for an outlet, will suffice. Make this felt in your
recordings, your artwork, your books. Social pressure keeps people so re-
pressed that they will be attracted to your charisma before they have even
met you in person.
The Savior. In March of 1917, the Russian parliament forced the coun-
try's ruler, Czar Nicholas, to abdicate and established a provisional govern-
ment. Russia was in rums. Its participation in World War I had been a
disaster; famine was spreading widely, the vast countryside was riven by
looting and lynch law, and soldiers were deserting from the army en masse.
Politically the country was bitterly divided; the main factions were the
right, the social democrats, and the left-wing revolutionaries, and each of
these groups was itself afflicted by dissension.
Into this chaos came the forty-seven-year-old Vladimir Ilyich Lenin. A
Marxist revolutionary, the leader of the Bolshevik Communist party, he
had suffered a twelve-year exile in Europe until, recognizing the chaos
overcoming Russia as the chance he had long been waiting for, he had hur-
ried back home. Now he called for the country to end its participation in
the war and for an immediate socialist revolution. In the first weeks after his
arrival, nothing could have seemed more ridiculous. As a man, Lenin
looked unimpressive; he was short and plain-featured. He had also spent
years away in Europe, isolated from his people and immersed in reading and
intellectual argument. Most important, his party was small, representing
only a splinter group within the loosely organized left coalition. Few took
him seriously as a national leader.
Undaunted, Lenin went to work. Wherever he went, he repeated the
same simple message: end the war, establish the rule of the proletariat,
abolish private property, redistribute wealth. Exhausted with the nation's
endless political infighting and the complexity of its problems, people be-
gan to listen. Lenin was so determined, so confident. He never lost his
cool. In the midst of a raucous debate, he would simply and logically de-
bunk each one of his adversaries' points. Workers and soldiers were im-He is their god. He leads
them like a thing \ Made
by some other deity than
nature, \ That shapes man
better; and they follow him
\ Against us brats with no
less confidence \ Than boys
pursuing summer butterflies
\ Or butchers killing
flies. . . .
—WILLIAM SHAKESPEARE,
CORIOLANUS
The roof did lift as Presley
came onstage. He sang for
twenty-five minutes while
the audience erupted like
Mount Vesuvius. "I never
saw such excitement and
screaming in my entire life,
ever before or since," said
[film director Hal] Kanter.
As an observer, he
describ-ed being stunned by
"an exhibition of public
mass hysteria . . . a tidal
wave of adoration surging
up from 9,000 people,
over the wall of police
flanking the stage, up over
the flood-lights, to the
performer and beyond him,
lifting him to frenzied
heights of response."
—A DESCRIPTION OF ELVIS
PRESLEY'S CONCERT AT THE
HAYRIDE THEATER, SHREVEPORT,
LOUISIANA, DECEMBER 17, 1956,
IN PETER WHITMER, THE INNER
ELVIS: A PSYCHOLOGICAL
BIOGRAPHY OF ELVIS AARON
PRESLEY
