82 • The Art of Seduction
addicted to you and grow dependent on you. On a mass level, make ges-
tures of self-sacrifice (no matter how fake) to show the public that you
share their pain and are working in their interest, self-interest being the
public form of egotism.
Be a source of pleasure. No one wants to hear about your problems and
troubles. Listen to your targets' complaints, but more important, distract
them from their problems by giving them pleasure. (Do this often enough
and they will fall under your spell.) Being lighthearted and fun is always
more charming than being serious and critical. An energetic presence is
likewise more charming than lethargy, which hints at boredom, an enor-
mous social taboo; and elegance and style will usually win out over vul-
garity, since most people like to associate themselves with whatever they
think elevated and cultured. In politics, provide illusion and myth rather
than reality. Instead of asking people to sacrifice for the greater good, talk
of grand moral issues. An appeal that makes people feel good will translate
into votes and power.
Bring antagonism into harmony. The court is a cauldron of resentment
and envy, where the sourness of a single brooding Cassius can quickly turn
into a conspiracy. The Charmer knows how to smooth out conflict. Never
stir up antagonisms that will prove immune to your charm; in the face of
those who are aggressive, retreat, let them have their little victories. Yield-
ing and indulgence will charm the fight out of any potential enemies.
Never criticize people overtly—that will make them insecure, and resistant
to change. Plant ideas, insinuate suggestions. Charmed by your diplomatic
skills, people will not notice your growing power.
Lull your victims into ease and comfort. Charm is like the hypnotist's
trick with the swinging watch: the more relaxed the target, the easier it is
to bend him or her to your will. The key to making your victims feel com-
fortable is to mirror them, adapt to their moods. People are narcissists—
they are drawn to those most similar to themselves. Seem to share their
values and tastes, to understand their spirit, and they will fall under your
spell. This works particularly well if you are an outsider: showing that you
share the values of your adopted group or country (you have learned their
language, you prefer their customs, etc.) is immensely charming, since for
you this preference is a choice, not a question of birth. Never pester or be
overly persistent—these uncharming qualities will disrupt the relaxation
you need to cast your spell.slavish or not, such
attentions please. . . .
—OVID, THE ART OF LOVE,
TRANSLATED BY PETER GREEN
Disraeli was asked to
dinner, and came in green
velvet trousers, with a
canary waistcoat, buckle
shoes, and lace cuffs. His
appearance at first proved
disquieting, but on leaving
the table the guests
remarked to each other that
the wittiest talker at the
luncheon-party was the
man in the yellow
waistcoat. Benjamin had
made great advances in
social conversation since the
days of Murray's dinners.
Faithful to his method, he
noted the stages: "Do not
talk too much at present;
do not try to talk. But
whenever you speak, speak
with self-possession. Speak
in a subdued tone, and
always look at the person
whom you are addressing.
Before one can engage in
general conversation with
any effect, there is a certain
acquaintance with trifling
but amusing subjects which
must be first attained. You
will soon pick up sufficient
by listening and observing.
Never argue. In society
nothing must be discussed;
give only results. If any
person differ from you, bow
and turn the conversation.
In society never think;
always be on the watch, or
you will miss many
opportunities and say
many disagreeable things.
Talk to women, talk to
women as much as you
can. This is the best
school. This is the way to
gain fluency, because you
need not care what you say,
and had better not be
sensible. They, too, will
rally you on many points,
The Charmer • 83
Show calm and self-possession in the face of adversity. Adversity and
setbacks actually provide the perfect setting for charm. Showing a calm, un-
ruffled exterior in the face of unpleasantness puts people at ease. You seem
patient, as if waiting for destiny to deal you a better card—or as if you were
confident you could charm the Fates themselves. Never show anger, ill
temper, or vengefulness, all disruptive emotions that will make people de-
fensive. In the politics of large groups, welcome adversity as a chance to
show the charming qualities of magnanimity and poise. Let others get flus-
tered and upset—the contrast will redound to your favor. Never whine,
never complain, never try to justify yourself.
Make yourself useful. If done subtly, your ability to enhance the lives of
others will be devilishly seductive. Your social skills will prove important
here: creating a wide network of allies will give you the power to link
people up with each other, which will make them feel that by knowing
you they can make their lives easier. This is something no one can resist.
Follow-through is key: so many people will charm by promising a person
great things—a better job, a new contact, a big favor—but if they do not
follow through they make enemies instead of friends. Anyone can make a
promise; what sets you apart, and makes you charming, is your ability to
come through in the end, following up your promise with a definite action.
Conversely, if someone does you a favor, show your gratitude concretely.
In a world of bluff and smoke, real action and true helpfulness are perhaps
the ultimate charm.
Examples of Charmers
1. In the early 1870s, Queen Victoria of England had reached a low point
in her life. Her beloved husband, Prince Albert, had died in 1861, leaving
her more than grief stricken. In all of her decisions she had relied on his
advice; she was too uneducated and inexperienced to do otherwise, or so
everyone made her feel. In fact, with Albert's death, political discussions
and policy issues had come to bore her to tears. Now Victoria gradually
withdrew from the public eye. As a result, the monarchy became less popu-
lar and therefore less powerful.
In 1874, the Conservative Party came to power, and its leader, the
seventy-year-old Benjamin Disraeli, became prime minister. The protocol
of his accession to his seat demanded that he come to the palace for a pri-
vate meeting with the queen, who was fifty-five at the time. Two more un-
likely associates could not be imagined: Disraeli, who was Jewish by birth,
had dark skin and exotic features by English standards; as a young man he
had been a dandy, his dress bordering on the flamboyant, and he had writ-
ten popular novels that were romantic or even Gothic in style. The queen,
on the other hand, was dour and stubborn, formal in manner and simple inand as they are women you
will not be offended.
Nothing is of so much
importance and of so
much use to a young man
entering life as to be well
criticised by women."
—ANDRÉ MAUROIS, DISRAELI,
TRANSLATED BY HAMISH MILES
You know what charm is:
a way of getting the answer
yes without having asked
any clear question.
—ALBERT CAMUS
A speech that carries its
audience along with it and
is applauded is often less
suggestive simply because it
is clear that it sets out to be
persuasive. People talking
together influence each
other in close proximity by
means of the tone of voice
they adopt and the way
they look at each other and
not only by the kind of
language they use. We are
right to call a good
conversationalist a charmer
in the magical sense of the
word.
—GUSTAVE TARDE, L'OPINION
ET LA FOULE, QUOTED IN SERGE
MOSCOVICI, THE AGE OF THE
CROWD
