Enter Their Spirit • 223
one whose journalistic experience lay elsewhere. At his first meeting with
Adams, he sent mixed signals: he was friendly to her, but hinted at another
kind of interest as well. Then, having insinuated a doubt in her mind (Per-
haps he just wants an affair?), he proceeded to mirror her. He indulged her
every mood, retreating every time she complained. Indulging a person is a
form of entering their spirit, letting them dominate for the time being.
Perhaps Sukarno's passes at Adams showed his uncontrollable libido at
work, or perhaps they were more cunning. He had a reputation as a Don
Juan; failing to make a pass at her would have hurt her feelings. (Women
are often less offended at being found attractive than one imagines, and
Sukarno was clever enough to have given each of his four wives the im-
pression that she was his favorite.) The pass out of the way, he moved fur-
ther into her spirit, taking on her casual air, even slightly feminizing himself
by adopting her hair color. The result was that she decided he was not what
she had expected or feared him to be. He was not in the least threatening,
and after all, she was the one in control. What Adams failed to realize was
that once her defenses were lowered, she was oblivious to how deeply he
had engaged her emotions. She had not charmed him, he had charmed her.
What he wanted all along was what he got: a personal memoir written by a
sympathetic foreigner, who gave the world a rather engaging portrait of a
man of whom many were suspicious.
Of all the seductive tactics, entering someone's spirit is perhaps the
most devilish of all. It gives your victims the feeling that they are seducing
you. The fact that you are indulging them, imitating them, entering their
spirit, suggests that you are under their spell. You are not a dangerous se-
ducer to be wary of, but someone compliant and unthreatening. The atten-
tion you pay to them is intoxicating—since you are mirroring them,
everything they see and hear from you reflects their own ego and tastes.
What a boost to their vanity. All this sets up the seduction, the series of ma-
neuvers that will turn the dynamic around. Once their defenses are down,
they are open to your subtle influence. Soon you will begin to take over the
dance, and without even noticing the shift, they will find themselves enter-
ing your spirit. This is the endgame.
Women are not at their ease except with those who take
chances with them, and enter into their spirit.
—NINON DE L'ENCLOS
Keys to Seduction
One of the great sources of frustration in our lives is other people's
stubbornness. How hard it is to reach them, to make them see things
our way. We often have the impression that when they seem to be listening
to us, and apparently agreeing with us, it is all superficial—the moment we
are gone, they revert to their own ideas. We spend our lives butting upthat the house belonged to
a member of the wealthy
and powerful Barmecide
family. Shakashik
approached the door-
keepers and solicited alms.
• "Go in," they said,
"and our master will give
you all that you desire." •
My brother entered the
lofty vestibule and
proceeded to a spacious,
marble-paved hall, hung
with tapestry and
overlooking a beautiful
garden. He stood
bewildered for a moment,
not knowing where to turn
his steps, and then
advanced to the far end of
the hall. There, among the
cushions, reclined a
handsome old man with a
long beard, whom my
brother recognized at once
as the master of the house.
• "What can I do for you,
my friend?" asked the old
man, as he rose to welcome
my brother. • When
Shakashik replied that he
was a hungry beggar,
the old man expressed the
deepest compassion and
rent his fine robes, crying:
"Is it possible that there
should be a man as hungry
as yourself in a city where
I am living? It is, indeed, a
disgrace that I cannot
endure!" Then he
comforted my brother,
adding: "I insist that you
stay with me and partake
of my dinner." • With this
the master of the house
clapped his hands and
called out to one of the
slaves: "Bring in the basin
and ewer." Then he said to
my brother: "Come
forward, my friend, and
wash your hands." •
Shakashik rose to do so,
but saw neither ewer nor
basin. He was bewildered
to see his host make
gestures as though he were
pouring water on his hands
224 • The Art of Seduction
against people, as if they were stone walls. But instead of complaining
about how misunderstood or ignored you are, why not try something dif-
ferent: instead of seeing other people as spiteful or indifferent, instead of
trying to figure out why they act the way they do, look at them through
the eyes of the seducer. The way to lure people out of their natural in-
tractability and self-obsession is to enter their spirit.
All of us are narcissists. When we were children our narcissism was
physical: we were interested in our own image, our own body, as if it were
a separate being. As we grow older, our narcissism grows more psychologi-
cal: we become absorbed in our own tastes, opinions, experiences. A hard
shell forms around us. Paradoxically, the way to entice people out of this
shell is to become more like them, in fact a kind of mirror image of them.
You do not have to spend days studying their minds; simply conform to
their moods, adapt to their tastes, play along with whatever they send your
way. In doing so you will lower their natural defensiveness. Their sense of
self-esteem does not feel threatened by your strangeness or different habits.
People truly love themselves, but what they love most of all is to see their
ideas and tastes reflected in another person. This validates them. Their ha-
bitual insecurity vanishes. Hypnotized by their mirror image, they relax.
Now that their inner wall has crumbled, you can slowly draw them out,
and eventually turn the dynamic around. Once they are open to you, it be-
comes easy to infect them with your own moods and heat. Entering the
other person's spirit is a kind of hypnosis; it is the most insidious and effec-
tive form of persuasion known to man.
In the eighteenth-century Chinese novel The Dream of the Red Cham-
ber, all the young girls in the prosperous house of Chia are in love with the
rakish Pao Yu. He is certainly handsome, but what makes him irresistible is
his uncanny ability to enter a young girl's spirit. Pao Yu has spent his youth
around girls, whose company he has always preferred. As a result, he never
comes over as threatening and aggressive. He is granted entry to girls'
rooms, they see him everywhere, and the more they see him the more they
fall under his spell. It is not that Pao Yu is feminine; he remains a man, but
one who can be more or less masculine as the situation requires. His famil-
iarity with young girls allows him the flexibility to enter their spirit.
This is a great advantage. The difference between the sexes is what
makes love and seduction possible, but it also involves an element of fear
and distrust. A woman may fear male aggression and violence; a man is
often unable to enter a woman's spirit, and so he remains strange and
threatening. The greatest seducers in history, from Casanova to John F.
Kennedy, grew up surrounded by women and had a touch of femininity
themselves. The philosopher Søren Kierkegaard, in his novel The Seducer's
Diary, recommends spending more time with the opposite sex, getting to
know the "enemy" and its weaknesses, so that you can turn this knowledge
to your advantage.
Ninon de l'Enclos, one of the greatest seductresses who ever lived, had
definite masculine qualities. She could impress a man with her intensefrom an invisible vessel and
then drying them with an
invisible towel. When he
finished, the host called out
to his attendants: "Bring
in the table!" • Numerous
servants hurried in and out
of the hall, as though they
were preparing for a meal.
My brother could still see
nothing. Yet his host
invited him to sit at the
imaginary table, saying,
"Honor me by eating of
this meat." • The old man
moved his hands about as
though he were touching
invisible dishes, and also
moved his jaws and lips as
though he were chewing.
Then said he to
Shakashik: "Eat your fill,
my friend, for you must be
famished." • My brother
began to move his jaws, to
chew and swallow, as
though he were eating,
while the old man still
coaxed him, saying: "Eat,
my friend, and note the
excellence of this bread and
its whiteness. " • "This
man," thought Shakashik,
"must be fond of practical
jokes. " So he said, "It is,
sir, the whitest bread I have
ever seen, and I have never
tasted the like in all my
life. " • "This bread," said
the host, "was baked by a
slave girl whom I bought
for five hundred dinars."
Then he called out to one
of his slaves: "Bring in the
meat pudding, and let there
be plenty of fat in it!"
• ... Thereupon the host
moved his fingers as though
to pick up a morsel from an
imaginary dish, and
popped the invisible
delicacy into my brother's
mouth. • The old man
continued to enlarge upon
the excellences of the
various dishes, while my
brother became so
ravenously hungry that he
would have willingly died
