156 • The Art of Seduction
stir your target's competitive juices and get their minds turning. Let your
Professors keep their sense of mental superiority; let them judge you. You
will know what they will try to hide: that you are the one in control, for
you are giving them what no one else can give them—physical stimulation.
The Beauty. From early on in life, the Beauty is gazed at by others. Their
desire to look at her is the source of her power, but also the source of much
unhappiness: she constantly worries that her powers are waning, that she
is no longer attracting attention. If she is honest with herself, she also
senses that being worshiped only for one's appearance is monotonous and
unsatisfying—and lonely. Many men are intimidated by beauty and prefer
to worship it from afar; others are drawn in, but not for the purpose of
conversation. The Beauty suffers from isolation.
Because she has so many lacks, the Beauty is relatively easy to seduce,
and if done right, you will have won not only a much prized catch but
someone who will grow dependent on what you provide. Most important
in this seduction is to validate those parts of the Beauty that no one else
appreciates—her intelligence (generally higher than people imagine), her
skills, her character. Of course you must worship her body—you cannot
stir up any insecurities in the one area in which she knows her strength, and
the strength on which she most depends—but you also must worship her
mind and soul. Intellectual stimulation will work well on the Beauty, dis-
tracting her from her doubts and insecurities, and making it seem that you
value that side of her personality.
Because the Beauty is always being looked at, she tends to be passive.
Beneath her passivity, though, there often lies frustration: the Beauty would
love to be more active and to actually do some chasing of her own. A little
coquettishness can work well here: at some point in all your worshiping,
you might go a little cold, inviting her to come after you. Train her to be
more active and you will have an excellent victim. The only downside is
that her many insecurities require constant attention and care.
The Aging Baby. Some people refuse to grow up. Perhaps they are afraid
of death or of growing old; perhaps they are passionately attached to the
life they led as children. Disliking responsibility, they struggle to turn
everything into play and recreation. In their twenties they can be charming,
in their thirties interesting, but by the time they reach their forties they are
beginning to wear thin.
Contrary to what you might imagine, one Aging Baby does not want
to be involved with another Aging Baby, even though the combination
might seem to increase the chances for play and frivolity. The Aging Baby
does not want competition, but an adult figure. If you desire to seduce this
type, you must be prepared to be the responsible, staid one. That may be a
The Seducer's Victims—The Eighteen Types • 157
strange way of seducing, but in this case it works. You should appear to like
the Aging Baby's youthful spirit (it helps if you actually do), can engage
with it, but you remain the indulgent adult. By being responsible you free
the Baby to play. Act the loving adult to the hilt, never judging or criticiz-
ing their behavior, and a strong attachment will form. Aging Babies can be
amusing for a while, but, like all children, they are often potently narcissis-
tic. This limits the pleasure you can have with them. You should see them
as short-term amusements or temporary outlets for your frustrated parental
instincts.
The Rescuer. We are often drawn to people who seem vulnerable or
weak—their sadness or depression can actually be quite seductive. There
are people, however, who take this much further, who seem to be attracted
only to people with problems. This may seem noble, but Rescuers usually
have complicated motives: they often have sensitive natures and truly want
to help. At the same time, solving people's problems gives them a kind of
power they relish—it makes them feel superior and in control. It is also the
perfect way to distract them from their own problems. You will recognize
these types by their empathy—they listen well and try to get you to open
up and talk. You will also notice they have histories of relationships with
dependent and troubled people.
Rescuers can make excellent victims, particularly if you enjoy chival-
rous or maternal attention. If you are a woman, play the damsel in distress,
giving a man the chance so many men long for—to act the knight. If you
are a man, play the boy who cannot deal with this harsh world; a female
Rescuer will envelop you in maternal attention, gaining for herself the
added satisfaction of feeling more powerful and in control than a man. An
air of sadness will draw either gender in. Exaggerate your weaknesses, but
not through overt words or gestures—let them sense that you have had too
little love, that you have had a string of bad relationships, that you have got-
ten a raw deal in life. Having lured your Rescuer in with the chance to help
you, you can then stoke the relationship's fires with a steady supply of
needs and vulnerabilities. You can also invite moral rescue: you are bad.
You have done bad things. You need a stern yet loving hand. In this case
the Rescuer gets to feel morally superior, but also the vicarious thrill of in-
volvement with someone naughty.
The Roué. These types have lived the good life and experienced many
pleasures. They probably have, or once had, a good deal of money to fi-
nance their hedonistic lives. On the outside they tend to seem cynical and
jaded, but their worldliness often hides a sentimentality that they have
struggled to repress. Roués are consummate seducers, but there is one type
that can easily seduce them—the young and the innocent. As they get
