
The Tantalizing Object
Some time in the 1880s, a gentleman named Don Juan de Todellas was
wandering through a park in Madrid when he saw a woman in her early
twenties getting out of a coach, followed by a two-year-old child and a
nursemaid. The young woman was elegantly dressed, but what took Don
Juan's breath away was her resemblance to a woman he had known nearly
three years before. Surely she could not be the same person. The woman he
had known, Cristeta Moreruela, was a showgirl in a second-rate theater.
She had been an orphan and was quite poor—her circumstances could not
have changed that much. He moved closer: the same beautiful face. And
then he heard her voice. He was so shocked that he had to sit down: it was
indeed the same woman.
Don Juan was an incorrigible seducer, whose conquests were innu-
merable and of every variety. But he remembered his affair with Cristeta
quite clearly, because she had been so young—the most charming girl he
had ever met. He had seen her in the theater, had courted her assiduously,
and had managed to persuade her to take a trip with him to a seaside town.
Although they had separate rooms, nothing could stop Don Juan: he made
up a story about business troubles, gained her sympathy, and in a tender
moment took advantage of her weakness. A few days later he left her, on
the pretext that he had to attend to business. He believed he would never
see her again. Feeling a little guilty—a rare occurrence with him—he sent
her 5,000 pesetas, pretending he would eventually rejoin her. Instead he
went to Paris. He had only recently returned to Madrid.
As he sat and remembered all this, an idea troubled him: the child.
Could the boy possibly be his? If not, she must have married almost imme-
diately after their affair. How could she do such a thing? She was obviously
wealthy now. Who could her husband be? Did he know her past? Mixed
with his confusion was intense desire. She was so young and beautiful. Why
had he given her up so easily? Somehow, even if she was married, he had to
get her back.
Don Juan began to frequent the park every day. He saw her a few more
times; their eyes met, but she pretended not to notice him. Tracing the
nursemaid during one of her errands, he struck up a conversation with her,
and asked her about her mistress's husband. She told him the man's name
was Señor Martínez, and that he was away on an extended business trip; she
also told him where Cristeta now lived. Don Juan gave her a note to give toFor these two crimes
Tantalus was punished
with the ruin of his
kingdom and, after his
death by Zeus's own hand,
with eternal torment in the
company of Ixion,
Sisyphus, Tityus, the
Danaids, and others. Now
he hangs, perennially
consumed by thirst and
hunger, from the bough of
a fruit tree which leans over
a marshy lake. Its waves
lap against his waist, and
sometimes reach his chin,
yet whenever he bends
down to drink, they slip
away, and nothing remains
but the black mud at his
feet; or, if he ever succeeds
in scooping up a handful of
water, it slips through his
fingers before he can do
more than wet his cracked
lips, leaving him thirstier
than ever. The tree is laden
with pears, shining apples,
sweet figs, ripe olives and
pomegranates, which
dangle against his
shoulders; but whenever he
reaches for the luscious
fruit, a gust of wind whirls
them out of his reach.
—ROBERT GRAVES, THE GREEK
MYTHS, VOLUME 2
231
