The Charmer • 83
Show calm and self-possession in the face of adversity. Adversity and
setbacks actually provide the perfect setting for charm. Showing a calm, un-
ruffled exterior in the face of unpleasantness puts people at ease. You seem
patient, as if waiting for destiny to deal you a better card—or as if you were
confident you could charm the Fates themselves. Never show anger, ill
temper, or vengefulness, all disruptive emotions that will make people de-
fensive. In the politics of large groups, welcome adversity as a chance to
show the charming qualities of magnanimity and poise. Let others get flus-
tered and upset—the contrast will redound to your favor. Never whine,
never complain, never try to justify yourself.
Make yourself useful. If done subtly, your ability to enhance the lives of
others will be devilishly seductive. Your social skills will prove important
here: creating a wide network of allies will give you the power to link
people up with each other, which will make them feel that by knowing
you they can make their lives easier. This is something no one can resist.
Follow-through is key: so many people will charm by promising a person
great things—a better job, a new contact, a big favor—but if they do not
follow through they make enemies instead of friends. Anyone can make a
promise; what sets you apart, and makes you charming, is your ability to
come through in the end, following up your promise with a definite action.
Conversely, if someone does you a favor, show your gratitude concretely.
In a world of bluff and smoke, real action and true helpfulness are perhaps
the ultimate charm.
Examples of Charmers
1. In the early 1870s, Queen Victoria of England had reached a low point
in her life. Her beloved husband, Prince Albert, had died in 1861, leaving
her more than grief stricken. In all of her decisions she had relied on his
advice; she was too uneducated and inexperienced to do otherwise, or so
everyone made her feel. In fact, with Albert's death, political discussions
and policy issues had come to bore her to tears. Now Victoria gradually
withdrew from the public eye. As a result, the monarchy became less popu-
lar and therefore less powerful.
In 1874, the Conservative Party came to power, and its leader, the
seventy-year-old Benjamin Disraeli, became prime minister. The protocol
of his accession to his seat demanded that he come to the palace for a pri-
vate meeting with the queen, who was fifty-five at the time. Two more un-
likely associates could not be imagined: Disraeli, who was Jewish by birth,
had dark skin and exotic features by English standards; as a young man he
had been a dandy, his dress bordering on the flamboyant, and he had writ-
ten popular novels that were romantic or even Gothic in style. The queen,
on the other hand, was dour and stubborn, formal in manner and simple inand as they are women you
will not be offended.
Nothing is of so much
importance and of so
much use to a young man
entering life as to be well
criticised by women."
—ANDRÉ MAUROIS, DISRAELI,
TRANSLATED BY HAMISH MILES
You know what charm is:
a way of getting the answer
yes without having asked
any clear question.
—ALBERT CAMUS
A speech that carries its
audience along with it and
is applauded is often less
suggestive simply because it
is clear that it sets out to be
persuasive. People talking
together influence each
other in close proximity by
means of the tone of voice
they adopt and the way
they look at each other and
not only by the kind of
language they use. We are
right to call a good
conversationalist a charmer
in the magical sense of the
word.
—GUSTAVE TARDE, L'OPINION
ET LA FOULE, QUOTED IN SERGE
MOSCOVICI, THE AGE OF THE
CROWD
84 • The Art of Seduction
taste. To please her, Disraeli was advised, he should curb his natural ele-
gance; but he disregarded what everyone had told him and appeared before
her as a gallant prince, falling to one knee, taking her hand, and kissing it,
saying, "I plight my troth to the kindest of mistresses." Disraeli pledged that
his work now was to realize Victoria's dreams. He praised her qualities so
fulsomely that she blushed; yet strangely enough, she did not find him
comical or offensive, but came out of the encounter smiling. Perhaps she
should give this strange man a chance, she thought, and she waited to see
what he would do next.
Victoria soon began receiving reports from Disraeli—on parliamentary
debates, policy issues, and so forth—that were unlike anything other minis-
ters had written. Addressing her as the "Faery Queen," and giving the
monarchy's various enemies all kinds of villainous code names, he filled his
notes with gossip. In a note about a new cabinet member, Disraeli wrote,
"He is more than six feet four inches in stature; like St. Peter's at Rome no
one is at first aware of his dimensions. But he has the sagacity of the ele-
phant as well as its form." The minister's blithe, informal spirit bordered on
disrespect, but the queen was enchanted. She read his reports voraciously,
and almost without her realizing it, her interest in politics was rekindled.
At the start of their relationship, Disraeli sent the queen all of his novels
as a gift. She in return presented him with the one book she had written,
Journal of Our Life in the Highlands. From then on he would toss out in his
letters and conversations with her the phrase, "We authors." The queen
would beam with pride. She would overhear him praising her to others—
her ideas, common sense, and feminine instincts, he said, made her the
equal of Elizabeth I. He rarely disagreed with her. At meetings with other
ministers, he would suddenly turn and ask her for advice. In 1875, when
Disraeli managed to finagle the purchase of the Suez Canal from the debt-
ridden khedive of Egypt, he presented his accomplishment to the queen as
if it were a realization of her own ideas about expanding the British Em-
pire. She did not realize the cause, but her confidence was growing by leaps
and bounds.
Victoria once sent flowers to her prime minister. He later returned the
favor, sending primroses, a flower so ordinary that some recipients might
have been insulted; but his gift came with a note: "Of all the flowers, the
one that retains its beauty longest, is sweet primrose." Disraeli was envelop-
ing Victoria in a fantasy atmosphere in which everything was a metaphor,
and the simplicity of the flower of course symbolized the queen—and also
the relationship between the two leaders. Victoria fell for the bait; prim-
roses were soon her favorite flower. In fact everything Disraeli did now met
with her approval. She allowed him to sit in her presence, an unheard-
of privilege. The two began to exchange valentines every February. The
queen would ask people what Disraeli had said at a party; when he paid a
little too much attention to Empress Augusta of Germany, she grew jeal-
ous. The courtiers wondered what had happened to the stubborn, formal
woman they had known—she was acting like an infatuated girl.Wax, a substance naturally
hard and brittle, can be
made soft by the
application of a little
warmth, so that it will take
any shape you please. In
the same way, by being
polite and friendly, you can
make people pliable and
obliging, even though they
are apt to be crabbed and
malevolent. Hence
politeness is to human
nature what warmth is to
wax.
—ARTHUR SCHOPENHAUER,
COUNSELS AND MAXIMS,
TRANSLATED BY T. BAILEY
SAUNDERS
Never explain. Never
complain.
—BENJAMIN DISRAELI
