Use Physical Lures • 403
a disordered look (Madame de Lursay's tousled hair, her ruffled dress) has
more effect on the senses than a neat appearance. It suggests the bedroom.
Second, be alert to the signs of physical excitation. Blushing, trembling of
the voice, tears, unusually forceful laughter, relaxing movements of the
body (any kind of involuntary mirroring, their gestures imitating yours), a
revealing slip of the tongue—these are signs that the victim is slipping into
the moment and pressure is to be applied.
In 1934, a Chinese football player named Li met a young actress named
Lan Ping in Shanghai. He began to see her often at his matches, cheering
him on. They would meet at public affairs, and he would notice her glanc-
ing at him with her "strange, yearning eyes," then looking away. One eve-
ning he found her seated next to him at a reception. Her leg brushed up
against his. They chatted, and she asked him to see a movie with her at a
nearby cinema. Once they were there, her head found its way onto his
shoulder; she whispered into his ear, something about the film. Later they
strolled the streets, and she put her arm around his waist. She brought him
to a restaurant where they drank some wine. Li took her to his hotel room,
and there he found himself overwhelmed by caresses and sweet words. She
gave him no room to retreat, no time to cool down. Three years later Lan
Ping—soon to be renamed Jiang Qing—played a similar game on Mao Ze-
dong. She was to become Mao's wife—the infamous Madame Mao, leader
of the Gang of Four.
Seduction, like warfare, is often a game of distance and closeness. At
first you track your enemy from a distance. Your main weapons are your
eyes, and a mysterious manner. Byron had his famous underlook, Madame
Mao her yearning eyes. The key is to make the look short and to the point,
then look away, like a rapier glancing the flesh. Make your eyes reveal de-
sire, and keep the rest of the face still. (A smile will spoil the effect.) Once
the victim is heated up, you quickly bridge the distance, turning to hand-
to-hand combat in which you give the enemy no room to withdraw, no
time to think or to consider the position in which you have placed him or
her. To take the element of fear out of this, use flattery, make the target feel
more masculine or feminine, praise their charms. It is their fault that you
have become so physical and aggressive. There is no greater physical lure
than to make the target feel alluring. Remember: the girdle of Aphrodite,
which gave her untold seductive powers, included that of sweet flattery.
Shared physical activity is always an excellent lure. The Russian mystic
Rasputin would begin his seductions with a spiritual lure—the promise of
a shared religious experience. But then his eyes would bore into his target
at a party, and inevitably he would lead her in a dance, which would be-
come more and more suggestive as he moved closer to her. Hundreds of
women succumbed to this technique. For Flynn it was swimming or sail-
ing. In such physical activity, the mind turns off and the body operates ac-
cording to its own laws. The target's body will follow your lead, will mirror
your moves, as far as you want it to go.
In the moment, all moral considerations fade away, and the body re-
404 • The Art of Seduction
turns to a state of innocence. You can partly create that feeling through a
devil-may-care attitude. You do not worry about the world, or what peo-
ple think of you; you do not judge your target in any way. Part of Flynn's
appeal was his total acceptance of a woman. He was not interested in a par-
ticular body type, a woman's race, her level of education, her political be-
liefs. He was in love with her feminine presence. He was luring her into an
adventure, free of society's strictures and moral judgments. With him she
could act out a fantasy—which, for many, was the chance to be aggressive
or transgressive, to experience danger. So empty yourself of your tendency
to moralize and judge. You have lured your targets into a momentary world
of pleasure—soft and accommodating, all rules and taboos thrown out the
window.
Symbol: The Raft. Floating out to sea, drifting with the current. Soon the shore-
line disappears from sight, and the two of you are alone. The water invites you to
forget all cares and worries, to submerge yourself. Without anchor or direction, cut
off from the past, you give in to the drifting sensation and slowly lose all restraint.
Reversal
Some people panic when they sense they are falling into the moment.
Often, using spiritual lures will help disguise the increasingly physical
nature of the seduction. That is how the lesbian seductress Natalie Barney
operated. In her heyday, at the turn of the twentieth century, lesbian sex
was immensely transgressive, and women new to it often felt a sense of
shame or dirtiness. Barney led them into the physical, but so enveloped it
in poetry and mysticism that they relaxed and felt purified by the experi-
ence. Today, few people feel repulsed by their sexual nature, but many are
uncomfortable with their bodies. A purely physical approach will frighten
and disturb them. Instead, make it seem a spiritual, mystical union, and
they will take less notice of your physical manipulations.
