Use Physical Lures • 399
about that, Flynn replied; and the following day he showed up at their
house with a beautiful gift for Blanca, a ring with her birthstone. Melting
under his charming smile, Blanca's mother agreed to his plan. Later that
day, Blanca found herself on a plane to Acapulco. It was all like a dream.
The Davises, under orders from Blanca's mother, tried not to let her
out of their sight, so Flynn put her on a raft and they drifted out into the
ocean, far from the shore. His flattering words filled her ears, and she let
him hold her hand and kiss her cheek. That night they danced together,
and when the evening was over he escorted her to her room and serenaded
her with a song as they finally parted. It was the end of a perfect day. In the
middle of the night, she woke up to hear him calling her name, from her
hotel-room balcony. How had he gotten there? His room was a floor
above; he must have somehow jumped or swung down, a dangerous ma-
neuver. She approached, not at all afraid, but curious. He pulled her gently
into his arms and kissed her. Her body convulsed; overwhelmed with new
sensations, totally at sea, she began to cry—out of happiness, she said.
Flynn comforted her with a kiss and returned to his room above, in the
same inexplicable way he had arrived. Now Blanca was hopelessly in love
with him and would do anything he asked of her. A few weeks later, in
fact, she followed him to Hollywood, where she went on to become a suc-
cessful actress, known as Linda Christian.
In 1942, an eighteen-year-old girl named Nora Eddington had a tem-
porary job selling cigarettes at the Los Angeles County courthouse. The
place was a madhouse at the time, teeming with tabloid journalists: two
young girls had charged Errol Flynn with rape. Nora of course noticed
Flynn, a tall, dashing man who occasionally bought cigarettes from her, but
her thoughts were with her boyfriend, a young Marine. A few weeks later
Flynn was acquitted, the trial ended, and the place settled down. A man she
had met during the trial called her up one day: he was Flynn's right-hand
man, and on Flynn's behalf, he wanted to invite her up to the actor's house
on Mulholland Drive. Nora had no interest in Flynn, and in fact she was a
little afraid of him, but a girlfriend who was dying to meet him talked her
into going and bringing her along. What did she have to lose? Nora agreed
to go. On the day, Flynn's friend showed up and drove them to a splendid
house on top of a hill. When they arrived, Flynn was standing shirtless by
his swimming pool. He came to greet her and her girlfriend, moving so
gracefully—like a lithe cat—and his manner so relaxed, she felt her jitters
melt away. He gave them a tour of the house, which was full of artifacts of
his various sea voyages. He talked so delightfully of his love of adventure
that she wished she had had adventures of her own. He was the perfect
gentleman, and even let her talk about her boyfriend without the slightest
sign of jealousy.
Nora had a visit from her boyfriend the next day. Somehow he didn't
seem so interesting anymore; they had a fight and broke up on the spot.
That night, Flynn took her out on the town, to the famous Mocambo
nightclub. He was drinking and joking, and she fell into the spirit, and hap-physical female. Nothing
more than that. When you
get hold of that—hang on
to it, for a short while."
—EARL CONRAD,
ERROL FLYNN: A MEMOIR
A sweet disorder in the
dress \ Kindles in clothes a
wantonness: \ A lawn
about the shoulders thrown
\ Into a fine distraction: \
An erring lace, which here
and there \ Enthralls the
crimson stomacher: \ A cuff
neglectful, and thereby \
Ribbands to flow
confusedly: \ A winning
wave (deserving note) \ In
the tempestuous petticoat: \
A careless shoestring, in
whose tie \ I see a wild
civility: \ Do more bewitch
me, than when art \ Is too
precise in every part.
—ROBERT HERRICK,"DELIGHT
IN DISORDER," QUOTED IN
PETER WASHINGTON, ED.,
EROTIC POEMS
Satni, the son of Pharaoh
Usimares, saw a very
beautiful woman on the
plain-stones of the temple.
He called his page, and
said, "Go and tell her that
I, Pharaoh's son, shall give
her ten pieces of gold to
spend an hour with me."
"I am a Pure One, I am
not a low person," answers
the Lady Thubuit. "If you
wish to have your pleasure
with me, you will come to
my house at Bubastis.
Everything will be ready
there." Satni went to
Bubastis by boat. "By my
life," said Thubuit, "come
upstairs with me." On the
upper floor, sanded with
dust of lapis lazuli and
turquoise, Satni saw
several beds covered with
royal linen and many gold
400 • The Art of Seduction
pily let him touch her hand. Then suddenly she panicked. "I'm a Catholic
and a virgin," she blurted out, "and some day I'm going to walk down the
church aisle wearing a veil—and if you think you're going to sleep with
me, you're mistaken." Totally calm and unruffled, Flynn said she had noth-
ing to fear. He simply liked being with her. She relaxed, and politely asked
him to put his hand back. Over the next few weeks she saw him almost
every day. She became his secretary. Soon she was spending weekend nights
as his house guest. He took her on skiing and boating trips. He remained
the perfect gentleman, but when he looked at her or touched her hand, she
felt overwhelmed by an exhilarating sensation, a tingling on her skin that
she compared to stepping into a cold-needle shower on a red-hot day. Soon
she was going to church less often, drifting away from the life she had
known. Although outwardly nothing had changed between them, inwardly
all semblance of resistance to him had melted away. One night, after a party,
she succumbed. She and Flynn eventually engaged in a stormy marriage
that lasted seven years.
Interpretation. The women who became involved with Errol Flynn (and
by the end of his life they numbered in the thousands) had every reason in
the world to feel suspicious of him: he was real life's closest thing to a Don
Juan. (In fact he had played the legendary seducer in a film.) He was con-
stantly surrounded by women, who knew that no involvement with him
could last. And then there were the rumors of his temper, and his love of
danger and adventure. No woman had greater reason to resist him than
Nora Eddington: when she met him he stood accused of rape; she was in-
volved with another man; she was a God-fearing Catholic. Yet she fell un-
der his spell, just like all the rest. Some seducers—D. H. Lawrence for
instance—operate mostly on the mind, creating fascination, stirring up the
need to possess them. Flynn operated on the body. His cool, nonchalant
manner infected women, lowering their resistance. This happened almost
the minute they met him, like a drug: he was at ease around women, grace-
ful and confident. They fell into this spirit, drifting along on a current he
created, leaving the world and its heaviness behind—it was only you and
him. Then—perhaps that same day, perhaps a few weeks later—there would
come a touch of his hand, a certain look, that would make them feel a tin-
gling, a vibration, a dangerously physical excitement. They would betray
that moment in their eyes, a blush, a nervous laugh, and he would swoop in
for the kill. No one moved faster than Errol Flynn.
The greatest obstacle to the physical part of the seduction is the target's
education, the degree to which he or she has been civilized and socialized.
Such education conspires to constrain the body, dull the senses, fill the
mind with doubts and worries. Flynn had the ability to return a woman to
a more natural state, in which desire, pleasure, and sex had nothing negative
attached to them. He lured women into adventure not with arguments butbowls on a table. "Please
take your meal," said
Thubuit. "That is not
what I have come to do,"
answered Satni, while the
slaves put aromatic wood
on the fire and scattered
scent about. "Do that for
which we have come here,"
Satni repeated. "First you
will make out a deed for
my maintenance," Thubuit
replied, "and you will
establish a dowry for me of
all the things and goods
which belong to you, in
writing." Satni acquiesced,
saying, "Bring me the
scribe of the school." •
When he had done what
she asked, Thubuit rose
and dressed herself in a
robe of fine linen, through
which Satni could see all
her limbs. His passion
increased, but she said, "If
it is true that you desire to
have your pleasure of me,
you will make your
children subscribe to my
deed, that they may not
seek a quarrel with my
children." Satni sent for
his children. "If it is true
that you desire to have
your pleasure of me, you
will cause your children to
be killed, that they may
not seek a quarrel with my
children." Satni consented
again: "Let any crime be
done to them which your
heart desires." "Go into
that room," said Thubuit;
and while the little corpses
were thrown out to the
stray dogs and cats, Satni
at last lay on a bed of ivory
and ebony, that his love
might be rewarded, and
Thubuit lay down at his
side. "Then," the texts
modestly say, "magic and
the god Amen did much."
• The charms of the
Divine Women must have
been irresistible, if even
"the wisest men" were
