The Ideal Lover • 33
study her, go along with her moods, find out what was missing in her life,
and provide it. He made himself the Ideal Lover. The bored burgomaster's
wife needed adventure and romance; she wanted someone who would sac-
rifice time and comfort to have her. For Miss Pauline what was missing was
friendship, lofty ideals, serious conversation; she wanted a man of breeding
and generosity who would treat her like a lady. For Ignazia, what was miss-
ing was suffering and torment. Her life was too easy; to feel truly alive, and
to have something real to confess, she needed to sin. In each case Casanova
adapted himself to the woman's ideals, brought her fantasy to life. Once she
had fallen under his spell, a little ruse or calculation would seal the romance
(a day among rats, a contrived fall from a horse, an encounter with another
woman to make Ignazia jealous).
The Ideal Lover is rare in the modern world, for the role takes effort.
You will have to focus intensely on the other person, fathom what she is
missing, what he is disappointed by. People will often reveal this in subtle
ways: through gesture, tone of voice, a look in the eye. By seeming to be
what they lack, you will fit their ideal.
To create this effect requires patience and attention to detail. Most
people are so wrapped up in their own desires, so impatient, they are inca-
pable of the Ideal Lover role. Let that be a source of infinite opportunity.
Be an oasis in the desert of the self-absorbed; few can resist the temptation
of following a person who seems so attuned to their desires, to bringing to
life their fantasies. And as with Casanova, your reputation as one who
gives such pleasure will precede you and make your seductions that much
The cultivation of the pleasures of the senses was ever my
principal aim in life. Knowing that I was personally calcu-
lated to please the fair sex, I always strove to make myself
agreeable to it.
—CASANOVA
The Beauty Ideal
In 1730, when Jeanne Poisson was a mere nine years old, a fortune-teller
predicted that one day she would be the mistress of Louis XV. The pre-
diction was quite ridiculous, since Jeanne came from the middle class, and
it was a tradition stretching back for centuries that the king's mistress be
chosen from among the nobility. To make matters worse, Jeanne's father
was a notorious rake, and her mother had been a courtesan.
Fortunately for Jeanne, one of her mother's lovers was a man of great
wealth who took a liking to the pretty girl and paid for her education.
Jeanne learned to sing, to play the clavichord, to ride with uncommon skill,
to act and dance; she was schooled in literature and history as if she were a
boy. The playwright Crébillon instructed her in the art of conversation.During the early 1970s,
against a turbulent political
backdrop that included the
fiasco of American
involvement in the
Vietnam War and the
downfall of President
Richard Nixon's
presidency in the Watergate
scandal, a "me generation"
sprang to prominence—and
[Andy] Warhol was there
to hold up its mirror.
Unlike the radicalized
protesters of the 1960s
who wanted to change all
the ills of society, the self-
absorbed "me" people
sought to improve their
bodies and to "get in
touch" with their own
feelings. They cared
passionately about their
appearance, health, life-
style, and bank accounts.
Andy catered to their self-
centeredness and inflated
pride by offering his
services as a portraitist. By
the end of the decade, he
would be internationally
recognized as one of the
leading portraitists of his
era. . . . • Warhol offered
his clients an irresistible
product: a stylish and
flattering portrait by a
famous artist who was
himself a certified celebrity.
Conferring an alluring star
presence upon even the
most celebrated of faces, he
transformed his subjects
into glamorous apparitions,
presenting their faces as he
thought they wanted to be
seen and remembered. By
filtering his sitters' good
features through his
silkscreens and
exaggerating their vivacity,
he enabled them to gain
entree to a more mythic
and rarefied level of
existence. The possession
of great wealth and power
might do for everyday life,
but the commissioning of a
portrait by Warhol was a
34 • The Art of Seduction
On top of it all, Jeanne was beautiful, and had a charm and grace that set
her apart early on. In 1741, she married a man of the lower nobility. Now
known as Madame d'Etioles, she could realize a great ambition: she opened
a literary salon. All of the great writers and philosophers of the time fre-
quented the salon, many because they were enamored of the hostess. One
of these was Voltaire, who became a lifelong friend.
Through all Jeanne's success, she never forgot the fortune-teller's pre-
diction, and still believed that she would one day conquer the king's heart.
It happened that one of her husband's country estates bordered on King
Louis's favorite hunting grounds. She would spy on him through the fence,
or find ways to cross his path, always while she happened to be wearing an
elegant, yet fetching outfit. Soon the king was sending her gifts of game.
When his official mistress died, in 1744, all of the court beauties vied to
take her place; but he began to spend more and more time with Madame
d'Etioles, dazzled by her beauty and charm. To the astonishment of the
court, that same year he made this middle-class woman his official mistress,
ennobling her with the title of the Marquise de Pompadour.
The king's need for novelty was notorious: a mistress would beguile
him with her looks, but he would soon grow bored with her and find
someone else. After the shock of his choice of Jeanne Poisson wore off, the
courtiers reassured themselves that it could not last—that he had only cho-
sen her for the novelty of having a middle-class mistress. Little did they
know that Jeanne s first seduction of the king was not the last seduction she
had in mind.
As time went by, the king found himself visiting his mistress more and
more often. As he ascended the hidden stair that led from his quarters to
hers in the palace of Versailles, anticipation of the delights that awaited him
at the top would begin to turn his head. First, the room was always warm,
and was filled with delightful scents. Then there were the visual delights:
Madame de Pompadour always wore a different costume, each one elegant
and surprising in its own way. She loved beautiful objects—fine porcelain,
Chinese fans, golden flowerpots—and every time he visited, there would
be something new and enchanting to see. Her manner was always light-
hearted; she was never defensive or resentful. Everything for pleasure. Then
there was their conversation: he had never been really able to talk with a
woman before, or to laugh, but the marquise could discourse skillfully on
any subject, and her voice was a pleasure to hear. And if the conversation
waned, she would move to the piano, play a tune, and sing wonderfully.
If ever the king seemed bored or sad, Madame de Pompadour would
propose some project—perhaps the building of a new country house. He
would have to advise in the design, the layout of the gardens, the decor.
Back at Versailles, Madame de Pompadour put hersell in charge of the
palace amusements, building a private theater for weekly performances un-
der her direction. Actors were chosen from among the courtiers, but the
female lead was always played by Madame de Pompadour, who was one of
the finest amateur actresses in France. The king became obsessed with thissure indication that the
sitter intended to secure a
posthumous fame as well.
Warhol's portraits were not
so much realistic documents
of contemporary faces as
they were designer icons
awaiting future devotions.
—DAVID BOURDON, WARHOL
Women have served all
these centuries as looking
glasses possessing the magic
and delicious power of
reflecting the figure of a
man at twice its natural
size.
—VIRGINIA WOOLF, A ROOM
OF ONE'S OWN
