200 • The Art of Seduction
with him, he will look unwanted and unwantable. But over there, in an-
other corner, is a woman surrounded by people. They laugh at her remarks,
and as they laugh, others join the group, attracted by its gaiety. When she
moves around, people follow. Her face is glowing with attention. There has
to be a reason.
In both cases, of course, there doesn't actually have to be a reason at
all. The neglected man may have quite charming qualities, supposing you
ever talk to him; but most likely you won't. Desirability is a social illu-
sion. Its source is less what you say or do, or any kind of boasting or self-
advertisement, than the sense that other people desire you. To turn your
targets' interest into something deeper, into desire, you must make them
see you as a person whom others cherish and covet. Desire is both imitative
(we like what others like) and competitive (we want to take away from oth-
ers what they have). As children, we wanted to monopolize the attention of
a parent, to draw it away from other siblings. This sense of rivalry pervades
human desire, repeating throughout our lives. Make people compete for
your attention, make them see you as sought after by everyone else. The
aura of desirability will envelop you.
Your admirers can be friends or even suitors. Call it the harem effect.
Pauline Bonaparte, sister of Napoleon, raised her value in men's eyes by al-
ways having a group of worshipful men around her at balls and parties. If
she went for a walk, it was never with one man, always with two or three.
Perhaps these men were simply friends, or even just props and hangers-on;
the sight of them was enough to suggest that she was prized and desired, a
woman worth fighting over. Andy Warhol, too, surrounded himself with
the most glamorous, interesting people he could find. To be part of his in-
ner circle meant that you were desirable as well. By placing himself in the
middle but keeping himself aloof from it all, he made everyone compete
for his attention. He stirred people's desire to possess him by holding back.
Practices like these not only stimulate competitive desires, they take aim
at people's prime weakness: their vanity and self-esteem. We can endure
feeling that another person has more talent, or more money, but the sense
that a rival is more desirable than we are—that is unbearable. In the early
eighteenth century, the Duke de Richelieu, a great rake, managed to se-
duce a young woman who was rather religious but whose husband, a dolt,
was often away. He then proceeded to seduce her upstairs neighbor, a
young widow. When the two women discovered that he was going from
one to the other in the same night, they confronted him. A lesser man
would have fled, but not the duke; he understood the dynamic of vanity
and desire. Neither woman wanted to feel that he preferred the other. And
so he managed to arrange a little menage a trois, knowing that now they
would struggle between themselves to be the favorite. When people's vani-
ty is at risk, you can make them do whatever you want. According to
Stendhal, if there is a woman you are interested in, pay attention to her sis-
ter. That will stir a triangular desire.
Your reputation—your illustrious past as a seducer—is an effective waysame way, in the presence
of your other female
friends. This will greatly
delight her, and you need
not be surprised if she
testifies her admiration of
your character by throwing
her arms around your neck
on the spot.
—LOLA MONTEZ, THE ARTS
AND SECRETS OF BEAUTY, WITH
HINTS TO GENTLEMEN ON THE
ART OF FASCINATING
[René] Girard's mimetic
desire occurs when an
individual subject desires
an object because it is
desired by another subject,
here designated as the
rival: desire is modeled on
the wishes or actions of
another. Philippe Lacoue-
Labarthe says that "the
basic hypothesis upon
which rests Girard's famous
analysis [is that] every
desire is the desire of the
other (and not immediately
desire of an object), every
structure of desire is
triangular (including the
other—mediator or
model—whose desire desire
imitates), every desire is
thus from its inception
tapped by hatred and
rivalry; in short, the origin
of desire is mimesis—
mimeticism—and no
desire is ever forged which
does not desire forthwith
the death or disappearance
of the model or exemplary
character which gave rise
to it.
—JAMES MANDRELL,
DON JUAN AND THE POINT OF
HONOR
Appear to Be an Object of Desire—Create Triangles • 201
of creating an aura of desirability. Women threw themselves at Errol Flynn's
feet, not because of his handsome face, and certainly not because of his
acting skills, but because of his reputation. They knew that other women
had found him irresistible. Once he had established that reputation, he did
not have to chase women anymore; they came to him. Men who believe
that a rakish reputation will make women fear or distrust them, and should
be played down, are quite wrong. On the contrary, it makes them more at-
tractive. The virtuous Duchess de Montpensier, the Grande Mademoiselle of
seventeenth-century France, began by enjoying a friendship with the rake
Lauzun, but a troubling thought soon occurred to her: if a man with
Lauzun's past did not see her as a possible lover, something had to be wrong
with her. This anxiety eventually pushed her into his arms. To be part of a
great seducer's club of conquests can be a matter of vanity and pride. We
are happy to be in such company, to have our name broadcast as this man or
woman's lover. Your own reputation may not be so alluring, but you must
find a way to suggest to your victim that others, many others, have found
you desirable. It is reassuring. There is nothing like a restaurant full of
empty tables to persuade you not to go in.
A variation on the triangle strategy is the use of contrasts: careful ex-
ploitation of people who are dull or unattractive may enhance your desir-
ability by comparison. At a social affair, for instance, make sure that your
target has to chat with the most boring person available. Come to the res-
cue and your target will be delighted to see you. In The Seducer's Diary, by
Søren Kierkegaard, Johannes has designs on the innocent young Cordelia.
Knowing that his friend Edward is hopelessly shy and dull, he encourages
this man to court her; a few weeks of Edward's attentions will make her
eyes wander in search of someone else, anyone else, and Johannes will make
sure that they settle on him. Johannes chose to strategize and maneuver, but
almost any social environment will contain contrasts you can make use of
almost naturally. The seventeenth-century English actress Nell Gwyn be-
came the main mistress of King Charles II because her humor and unaffect-
edness made her that much more desirable among the many stiff and
pretentious ladies of Charles's court. When the Shanghai actress Jiang Qing
met Mao Zedong, in 1937, she did not have to do much to seduce him;
the other women in his mountain camp in Yenan dressed like men, and
were decidedly unfeminine. The sight alone of Jiang was enough to seduce
Mao, who soon left his wife for her. To make use of contrasts, either de-
velop and display those attractive attributes (humor, vivacity, and so on) that
are the scarcest in your own social group, or choose a group in which your
natural qualities are rare, and will shine.
The use of contrasts has vast political ramifications, for a political figure
must also seduce and seem desirable. Learn to play up the qualities that your
rivals lack. Peter II, czar in eighteenth-century Russia, was arrogant and ir-
responsible, so his wife, Catherine the Great, did all she could to seem
modest and dependable. When Vladimir Lenin returned to Russia in 1917
after Czar Nicholas II had been deposed, he made a show of decisivenessIt's annoying that our new
acquaintance likes the boy.
But aren't the best things
in life free to all? The sun
shines on everyone. The
moon, accompanied by
countless stars, leads even
the beasts to pasture. What
can you think of lovelier
than water? But it flows
for the whole world. Is love
alone then something
furtive rather than
something to be gloried in?
Exactly, that's just it—I
don't want any of the good
things of life unless people
are envious of them.
—PETRONIUS, THE SATYRICON,
TRANSLATED BY J. P. SULLIVAN
