The Emotional Roller Coaster
One hot summer afternoon in 1894, Don Mateo Díaz, a thirty-eight-
year-old resident of Seville, decided to visit a local tobacco factory
Because of his connections Don Mateo was allowed to tour the place, but
his interest was not in the business side. Don Mateo liked young girls, and
hundreds of them worked in the factory. Just as he had expected, that day
many of them were in a state of near undress because of the heat—it was
quite a spectacle. He enjoyed the sights for a while, but the noise and the
temperature soon got to him. As he was heading for the door, though, a
worker of no more than sixteen called out to him: "Caballero, if you will
give me a penny I will sing you a little song."
The girl's name was Conchita Pérez, and she looked young and inno-
cent, in fact beautiful, with a sparkle in her eye that suggested a taste for ad-
venture. The perfect prey. He listened to her song (which seemed vaguely
suggestive), tossed her a coin that was equal to a month's salary, tipped his
hat, then left. It was never good to come on too strong too early. As he
walked along the street, he plotted how he would lure her into an affair.
Suddenly he felt a hand on his arm and he turned to see her walking along-
side him. It was too hot to work—would he be a gentleman and escort her
home? Of course. Do you have a lover? he asked her. No, she said, "I am
mozita"—pure, a virgin.
Conchita lived with her mother in a rundown part of town. Don Ma-
teo exchanged pleasantries, slipped the mother some money (he knew from
experience how important it was to keep the mother happy), then left. He
considered waiting a few days, but he was impatient, and returned the fol-
lowing morning. The mother was out. He and Conchita resumed their
playful banter from the day before, and to his surprise she suddenly sat in
his lap, put her arms around him, and kissed him. His strategy flying out
the window, he took hold of her and returned the kiss. She immediately
jumped up, her eyes flashing with anger: you are trifling with me, she said,
using me for a quick thrill. Don Mateo denied having any such intentions,
and apologized for going too far. When he left, he felt confused: she had
started it all; why should he feel guilty? And yet he did. Young girls can be
so unpredictable; it is best to break them in slowly
Over the next few days Don Mateo was the perfect gentleman. He
visited every day, showered mother and daughter with gifts, made no
advances—at least not at first. The damned girl had become so familiarThe more one pleases
generally, the less one
pleases profoundly.
—STENDHAL, LOVE,
TRANSLATED BY GILBERT AND
SUZANNE SALE
You should mix in the odd
rebuff \ With your cheerful
fun. Shut him out of the
house, let him wait there \
Cursing that locked front
door, let him plead \ And
threaten all he's a mind to.
Sweetness cloys the palate,
\ Bitter juice is a freshener.
Often a small skiff \ Is
sunk by favoring winds: it's
their husbands' access to
them, \ At will, that
deprives so many wives of
love. \ Let her put in a
door, with a hard-faced
porter to tell him \ "Keep
out," and he'll soon be
touched with desire \
Through frustration. Put
down your blunt foils, fight
with sharpened weapons \
(I don't doubt that my own
shafts \ Will be turned
against me). When a
new-captured lover \ Is
stumbling into the toils,
then let him believe \ He
alone has rights to your
bed—but later, make him
371
372 • The Art of Seduction
with him that she would dress in front of him, or greet him in her night-
gown. These glimpses of her body drove him crazy, and he would some-
times try to steal a kiss or caress, only to have her push him away and scold
him. Weeks went by; clearly he had shown that his was not a passing fancy.
Tired of the endless courtship, he took Conchita's mother aside one day
and proposed that he set the girl up in a house of her own. He would treat
her like a queen; she would have everything she wanted. (So, of course,
would her mother.) Surely his proposal would satisfy the two women—but
the next day, a note came from Conchita, expressing not gratitude but re-
crimination: he was trying to buy her love. "You shall never see me again,"
she concluded. He hurried to the house only to discover that the women
had moved out that very morning, without leaving word where they were
going.
Don Mateo felt terrible. Yes, he had acted like a boor. Next time he
would wait months, or years if need be, before being so bold. Soon, how-
ever, another thought assailed him: he would never see Conchita again.
Only then did he realize how much he loved her.
The winter passed, the worst of Mateo's life. One spring day he was
walking down the street when he heard someone calling his name. He
looked up: Conchita was standing in an open window, beaming with ex-
citement. She bent down toward him and he kissed her hand, beside him-
self with joy. Why had she disappeared so suddenly? It was all going too
quickly, she said. She had been afraid—of his intentions, and of her own
feelings. But seeing him again, she was certain that she loved him. Yes, she
was ready to be his mistress. She would prove it, she would come to him.
Being apart had changed them both, he thought.
A few nights later, as promised, she appeared at his house. They kissed
and began to undress. He wanted to savor every minute, to take it slowly,
but he felt like a caged bull finally set free. He followed her into bed, his
hands all over her. He started to take off her underwear but it was laced up
in some complicated way. Eventually he had to sit up and take a look: she
was wearing some elaborate canvas contraption, of a kind he had never
seen. No matter how hard he tugged and pulled, it would not come off.
He felt like hitting Conchita, he was so distraught, but instead he started to
cry. She explained: she wanted to do everything with him, yet to remain a
mozita. This was her protection. Exasperated, he sent her home.
Over the next few weeks, Don Mateo began to reassess his opinion of
Conchita. He saw her flirting with other men, and dancing a suggestive fla-
menco in a bar: she was not a mozita, he decided, she was playing him for
money. And yet he could not leave her. Another man would take his
place—an unbearable thought. She would invite him to spend the night in
her bed, as long as he promised not to force himself on her; and then, as if
to torture him beyond reason, she would get into bed naked (supposedly
because of the heat). All this he put up with on the grounds that no other
man had such privileges. But one night, pushed to the limits of frustration,
he exploded with anger, and issued an ultimatum: either give me what Iconscious \ Of rivals, of
shared delights. Neglect \
These devices—his ardor
will wane. A racehorse runs
most strongly \ When the
field's ahead, to be paced \
And passed. So the dying
embers of passion can be
fanned to \ Fresh flame by
some outrage—I can only
love, \ Myself, I confess it,
when wronged. But don't
let the cause of \ Pain be
too obvious: let a lover
suspect \ More than he
knows. Invent a slave who
watches your every \
Movement, make clear
what a jealous martinet \
That man of yours is—
such things will excite him.
Pleasure \ Too safely
enjoyed lacks zest. You
want to be free \ As Thaïs?
Act scared. Though the
door's quite safe, let him in
by \ The window. Look
nervous. Have a smart \
Maid rush in, scream
"We're caught!" while you
bundle the quaking \ Youth
out of sight. But be sure \
To offset his fright with
some moments of carefree
pleasure— \ Or he'll think
a night with you isn't
worth the risk.
—OVID. THE ART OF LOVE,
TRANSLATED BY PETER GREEN
"Certainly," I said, "I
have often told you that
pain holds a peculiar
attraction for me, and that
nothing kindles my passion
quite so much as tyranny
cruelty and above all
unfaithfulness in a
beautiful woman."
—LEOPOLD VON SACHER-
MASOCH, VENUS IN FURS,
TRANSLATED BY JEAN MCNEIL
