Mix Pleasure with Pain • 375
praised him for his role in the rapprochement with China. Without real-
izing it, Kissinger began to open up. He talked of the pain he felt in dealing
with Vietnam, the pleasures of wielding power. Then suddenly the harsher
questions returned—was he simply Nixon's lackey, as many suspected? Up
and down she went, alternately baiting and flattering him. His goal had
been to pump her for information while revealing nothing about himself;
by the end, though, she had given him nothing, while he had revealed a
range of embarrassing opinions—his view of women as playthings, for in-
stance, and his belief that he was popular with the public because people
saw him as a kind of lonesome cowboy, the hero who cleans things up by
himself. When the interview was published, Nixon, Kissinger's boss, was
livid about it.
In 1973, the Shah of Iran, Mohammed Riza Pahlavi, granted Fallaci an
interview. He knew how to handle the press—be noncommittal, speak in
generalities, seem firm, yet polite. This approach had worked a thousand
times before. Fallaci began the interview on a personal level, asking how it
felt to be a king, to be the target of assassination attempts, and why the
shah always seemed so sad. He talked of the burdens of his position, the
pain and loneliness he felt. It seemed a release of sorts to talk about his pro-
fessional problems. As he talked, Fallaci said little, her silence goading him
on. Then she suddenly changed the subject: he was having difficulties with
his second wife. Surely that must hurt him? This was a sore spot, and
Pahlavi got angry. He tried to change the subject, but she kept returning to
it. Why waste time talking about wives and women, he said. He then went
so far as to criticize women in general—their lack of creativity, their cru-
elty. Fallaci kept at him: he had dictatorial tendencies and his country
lacked basic freedoms. Fallaci's own books were on his government's black-
list. Hearing this, the shah seemed somewhat taken aback—perhaps he was
dealing with a subversive writer. But then she softened her tone again,
asked him about his many achievements. The pattern repeated: the mo-
ment he relaxed, she blindsided him with a sharp question; when he grew
bitter, she lightened the mood. Like Kissinger, he found himself opening
up despite himself and mentioning things he would later regret, such as his
intention to raise the price of oil. Slowly he fell under her spell, even began
to flirt with her. "Even if you're on the blacklist of my authorities," he said
at the end of the interview, "I'll put you on the white list of my heart."
Interpretation. Most of Fallaci's interviews were with powerful leaders,
men and women with an overwhelming need to control the situation, to
avoid revealing anything embarrassing. This put her and her subjects in con-
flict, since getting them to open up—grow emotional, give up control—
was exactly what she wanted. The classic seductive approach of charm and
flattery would get her nowhere with these people; they would see right
through it. Instead, Fallaci preyed on their emotions, alternating harshness
and kindness. She would ask a cruel question that touched on the deepestwhole business of
eroticism is to destroy the
self-contained character of
the participators as they are
in their normal lives. . . .
We ought never to forget
that in spite of the bliss
love promises its first effect
is one of turmoil and
distress. Passion fulfilled
itself provokes such violent
agitation that the
happiness involved, before
being a happiness to be
enjoyed, is so great as to be
more like its opposite,
suffering. . . . The
likelihood of suffering is all
the greater since suffering
alone reveals the total
significance of the beloved
object.
—GEORGES BATAILLE,
EROTISM: DEATH AND
SENSUALITY, TRANSLATED BY
MARY DALWOOD
Always a little doubt to set
at rest—that's what keeps
one craving in passionate
love. Because the keenest
misgivings are always
there, its pleasures never
become tedious. • Saint-
Simon, the only historian
France has ever possessed,
says: "After many passing
fancies the Duchesse de
Berry had fallen deeply in
love with Riom, a junior
member of the d'Aydie
family, the son of one of
Madame de Biron's sisters.
He had neither looks nor
brains; he was fat, short,
chubby-cheeked, pale, and
had such a crop of pimples
that he seemed one large
abscess; he had beautiful
teeth, but not the least idea
that he was going to inspire
a passion which quickly got
out of control, a passion
which lasted a lifetime,
notwithstanding a number
of subsidiary flirtations and
affairs. . . . • He would
376 • The Art of Seduction
insecurities of the subject, who would get emotional and defensive; deep
down, though, something else would stir inside them—the desire to prove
to Fallaci that they did not deserve her implicit criticisms. Unconsciously
they wanted to please her, to make her like them. When she then shifted
tone, indirectly praising them, they felt they were winning her over and
were encouraged to open up. Without realizing it, they would give freer
rein to their emotions.
In social situations we all wear masks, and keep our defenses up. It is
embarrassing, after all, to reveal one's true feelings. As a seducer you must
find a way to lower these resistances. The Charmer's approach of flattery
and attention can be effective here, particularly with the insecure, but it can
take months of work, and can also backfire. To get a quicker result, and to
break down more inaccessible people, it is often better to alternate harsh-
ness and kindness. By being harsh you create inner tensions—your targets
may be upset with you, but they are also asking themselves questions. What
have they done to earn your dislike? When you then are kind, they feel
relieved, but also concerned that at any moment they might somehow dis-
please you again. Make use of this pattern to keep them in suspense—
dreading your harshness and keen to keep you kind. Your kindness and
harshness should be subtle; indirect digs and compliments are best. Play the
psychoanalyst: make cutting comments concerning their unconscious mo-
tives (you are only being truthful), then sit back and listen. Your silence will
goad them into embarrassing admissions. Leaven your judgments with oc-
casional praise and they will strive to please you, like dogs.
Love is a costly flower, but one must have the desire to
pluck it from the edge of a precipice.
—STENDHAL
Keys to Seduction
Almost everyone is more or less polite. We learn early on not to tell
people what we really think of them; we smile at their jokes, act inter-
ested in their stories and problems. It is the only way to live with them.
Eventually this becomes a habit; we are nice, even when it isn't really nec-
essary. We try to please other people, to not step on their toes, to avoid dis-
agreements and conflict.
Niceness in seduction, however, though it may at first draw someone to
you (it is soothing and comforting), soon loses all effect. Being too nice can
literally push the target away from you. Erotic feeling depends on the cre-
ation of tension. Without tension, without anxiety and suspense, there can
be no feeling of release, of true pleasure and joy It is your task to create
that tension in the target, to stimulate feelings of anxiety, to lead them to
and fro, so that the culmination of the seduction has real weight and inten-
sity. So rid yourself of your nasty habit of avoiding conflict, which is in anyexcite but not requite the
desire of the princess; he
delighted in making her
jealous, or pretending to be
jealous himself. He would
often drive her to tears.
Gradually he forced her
into the position of doing
nothing without his leave,
even trifles of no
importance. Sometimes,
when she was ready to go
to the Opera, he insisted
that she stay at home; and
sometimes he made her go
there against her will. He
obliged her to grant favours
to ladies she did not like or
of whom she was jealous.
She was not even free to
dress as she chose; he
would amuse himself by
making her change her
coiffure or her dress at the
last minute; he did this so
often and so publicly that
she became accustomed to
take his orders in the
evening for what she would
do and wear the following
day; then the next day he
would alter everything, and
the princess would cry all
the more. In the end she
took to sending him
messages by trusted
footmen, for from the first
he had taken up residence
in Luxembourg; messages
which continued
throughout her toilette, to
know what ribbons she
would wear, what gown
and other ornaments;
almost invariably he made
her wear something she did
not wish to. When she
occasionally dared to do
anything, however small,
without his leave, he
treated her like a servant,
and she was in tears for
several days. • . . . Before
assembled company he
would give her such
brusque replies that
everyone lowered their eyes,
and the Duchess would
blush, though her passion
