412 • The Art of'Seduction
part of the drama. The theatricality can come from the setting—an exotic
or sensual location. It can also come from your actions. The widow piqued
her victim's curiosity by creating the suspense about her bedroom. An ele-
ment of fear—someone might find you, say—will heighten the tension.
Remember: you are creating a moment that must stand out from the same-
ness of daily life.
Keeping your targets emotional will both weaken them and heighten
the drama of the moment. And the best way to keep them at an emotional
pitch is by infecting them with emotions of your own. When Valmont
wanted the Presidents to become calm, angry, or tender, he showed that
emotion first, and she mirrored it. People are very susceptible to the moods
of those around them; this is particularly acute at the latter stages of a se-
duction, when resistance is low and the target has fallen under your spell.
At the point of the bold move, learn to infect your target with whatever
emotional mood you require, as opposed to suggesting the mood with
words. You want access to the target's unconscious, which is best obtained
by infecting them with emotions, bypassing their conscious ability to resist.
It may seem expected for the male to make the bold move, but history
is full of successfully bold females. There are two main forms of feminine
boldness. In the first, more traditional form, the coquettish woman stirs
male desire, is completely in control, then at the last minute, after bringing
her victim to a boil, steps back and lets him make the bold move. She sets it
up, then signals with her eyes, her gestures, that she is ready for him. Cour-
tesans have used this method throughout history; it is how Cleopatra
worked on Antony, how Josephine seduced Napoleon, how La Belle Otero
amassed a fortune during the Belle Epoque. It lets the man maintain his
masculine illusions, although the woman is really the aggressor.
The second form of feminine boldness does not bother with such illu-
sions: the woman simply takes charge, initiates the first kiss, pounces on
her victim. This is how Marguerite de Valois, Lou Andreas-Salomé, and
Madame Mao operated, and many men find it not emasculating at all but
very exciting. It all depends on the insecurities and proclivities of the vic-
tim. This kind of feminine boldness has its allure because it is more rare
than the first kind, but then all boldness is somewhat rare. A bold move will
always stand out compared to the usual treatment afforded by the tepid hus-
band, the timid lover, the hesitant suitor. That is how you want it. If every-
one were bold, boldness would quickly lose its allure.
Master the Art of the Bold Move • 413
Symbol: The Summer Storm. The hot days follow one another,
with no end in sight. The earth is parched and dry. Then there
comes a stillness in the air, thick and oppressive—the calm
before the storm. Suddenly gusts of wind arrive, and
flashes of lightning, exciting and frightening. Allow-
ing no time to react or run for shelter, the rain
comes, and brings with it a sense of
release. At last.
Reversal
If two people come together by mutual consent, that is not a seduction.
There is no reversal.
