Beware the Aftereffects • 419
moods, he worked hard to please her, showering her with attention and
tenderness. Eventually the quarreling stopped, and as the days went by, de
Belleroche felt confident that Merteuil loved him—until one day, when he
came to visit, and found that she was not at home. Her footman greeted
him at the door, and said he would take the chevalier to a secret house of
Merteuil's outside Paris. There the marquise was waiting for him, in a re-
newed mood of coquettishness: she acted as if this were their first tryst.
The chevalier had never seen her so ardent. He left at daybreak more in
love than ever, but a few days later they quarreled again. The marquise
seemed cold after that, and he saw her flirt with another man at a party.
He felt horribly jealous, but as before, his solution was to become more
attentive and loving. This, he thought, was the way to appease a difficult
woman.
Now Merteuil had to spend a few weeks at her country home to han-
dle some business there. She invited de Belleroche to join her for an ex-
tended stay, and he happily agreed, remembering the new life an earlier stay
there had brought to their affair. Once again she surprised him: her affec-
tion and desire to please him were rejuvenated. This time, though, he did
not have to leave the next morning. Days went by, and she refused to enter-
tain any guests. The world would not intrude on them. And this time there
was no coldness or quarreling, only good cheer and love. Yet now de Belle-
roche began to grow a little tired of the marquise. He thought of Paris and
the balls he was missing; a week later he cut short his stay on some business
pretext and hurried back to the city. Somehow the marquise did not seem
so charming anymore.
Interpretation. The Marquise de Merteuil, a character in Choderlos de La-
clos's novel Dangerous Liaisons, is a practiced seductress who never lets her
affairs drag on too long. De Belleroche is young and handsome but that is
all. As her interest in him wanes, she decides to bring him to the secret
house to try to inject some novelty into the affair. This works for a while,
but it isn't enough. The chevalier must be gotten rid of. She tries coldness,
anger (hoping to start a fight), even a show of interest in another man. All
this only intensifies his attachment. She can't just leave him—he might be-
come vengeful, or try even harder to win her back. The solution: she delib-
erately breaks the spell by overwhelming him with attention. Abandoning
the pattern of alternating warmth with coldness, she acts hopelessly in love.
Alone with her day after day, with no space to fantasize, he no longer sees
her as enchanting and breaks off the affair. This was her goal all along.
If a break with the victim is too messy or difficult (or you lack the
nerve), then do the next best thing: deliberately break the spell that ties him
or her to you. Aloofness or anger will only stir the other person s insecurity,
producing a clinging horror. Instead, try suffocating them with love and at-
tention: be clinging and possessive yourself, moon over the lover's every ac-
tion and character trait, create the sense that this monotonous affection willsoon wrinkles will furrow \
Your body; soon, too soon,
your hair turn gray. \ Then
build an enduring mind,
add that to your beauty: \
It alone will last till the
flames \ Consume you.
Keep your wits sharp,
explore the liberal \Arts,
win mastery over Greek \
As well as Latin. Ulysses
was eloquent, not
handsome— \ Yet he filled
sea-goddesses' hearts \
With aching passion. . . .
\ Nothing works on a
mood like tactful tolerance:
harshness \ Provokes
hatred, makes nasty rows. \
We detest the hawk and
the wolf, those natural
hunters, \ Always preying
on timid flocks; \ But the
gentle swallow goes safe
from man's snares, we
fashion \ Little turreted
houses for doves. \ Keep
clear of all quarrels, sharp-
tongued recriminations— \
Love's sensitive, needs to
be fed \ With gentle words.
Leave nagging to wives
and husbands, \ Let them,
if they want, think it a
natural law, \ A permanent
state of feud. Wives thrive
on wrangling, \ That's their
dowry. A mistress should
always hear \ What she
wants to be told. . . . \
Use tender blandishments,
language that caresses \
The ear, make her glad
you came.
—OVID, THE ART OF LOVE,
TRANSLATED BY PETER GREEN
In Paris the band played a
concert at the Palais
Chaleux. They played the
first half, and then there
was an hour interval—
intermission, we call it—
during which there was a
fabulous buffet on a great
long table laden with
delicious foods and cognac,
420 • The Art of Seduction
go on forever. No more mystery, no more coquetry, no more retreats—-just
endless love. Few can endure such a threat. A few weeks of it and they will
be gone.
2. King Charles II of England was a devoted libertine. He kept a stable of
lovers: there was always a favorite mistress from the aristocracy, and count-
less other less important women. He craved variety. One evening in 1668,
the king spent an evening at the theater, where he conceived a sudden de-
sire for a young actress called Nell Gwyn. She was pretty and innocent
looking (only eighteen at the time), with a girlish glow in her cheeks, but
the lines she recited onstage were so impudent and saucy. Deeply excited,
the king decided he had to have her. After the performance he took her
out for a night of drinking and merriment, then led her to his royal bed.
Nell was the daughter of a fishmonger, and had begun by selling or-
anges in the theater. She rose to the status of actress by sleeping with writ-
ers and other theater men. She had no shame about this. (When a footman
of hers got into a fight with someone who said he worked for a whore, she
broke it up by saying, "I am a whore. Find something better to fight
about.") Nell's humor and sass amused the king greatly, but she was low-
born, and an actress, and he could hardly make her a favorite. After several
nights with "pretty, witty Nell," he returned to his principal mistress,
Louise Keroualle, a well-born Frenchwoman.
Keroualle was a clever seductress. She played hard to get, and made it
clear she would not give the king her virginity until he had promised her a
title. It was the kind of chase Charles enjoyed, and he made her the
Duchess of Portsmouth. But soon her greed and difficultness began to wear
on his nerves. To divert himself, he turned back to Nell. Whenever he vis-
ited her, he was royally entertained with food, drink, and her great good
humor. The king was bored or melancholy? She took him drinking or
gambling, or out to the country, where she taught him to fish. She always
had a pleasant surprise up her sleeve. What he loved most of all was her
wit, the way she mocked the pretentious Keroualle. The duchess had the
habit of going into mourning whenever a nobleman of another country
died, as if he were a relation. Nell, too, would show up at the palace on
these occasions dressed in black, and would sorrowfully say that she was
mourning for the "Cham of Tartary" or the "Boog of Oronooko"—grand
relatives of her own. To her face, she called the duchess "Squintabella" and
the "Weeping Willow," because of her simpering manners and melancholic
airs. Soon the king was spending more time with Nell than with the
duchess. By the time Keroualle fell out of favor, Nell had in essence be-
come the king's favorite, which she remained until his death, in 1685.
Interpretation. Nell Gwyn was ambitious. She wanted power and fame,
but in the seventeenth century the only way a woman could get thosechampagne, wine and that
rarity in Paris . . . Scotch.
The people, aristocrats and
servants, some on their
hands and knees, were
busily searching for
something on the floor. A
duchess, who was one of
the hostesses, had lost one
of her larger diamonds. . . .
The duchess finally got
bored seeing people looking
all over the floor for the
ring. She looked around
haughtily, then took Duke
by the arm, saying, "It
doesn't mean anything. I
can always get diamonds,
but how often can I get a
man like Duke
Ellington?" • She
disappeared with Duke.
The band started the
second half by themselves,
and eventually Duke
smilingly reappeared to
finish the concert.
—DON GEORGE, SWEET MAN:
THE REAL DUKE ELLINGTON
I do know, however, that
men become bigger-hearted
and better lovers once they
get the suspicion that their
mistresses care less about
them. When a man
believes himself to be the
one and only lover in a
woman's life, he'll whistle
and go his way. • / ought
to know; I have followed
this profession for the last
twenty years. If you want
me to, I will tell you what
happened to me a few years
ago. • At that time I had a
steady lover, a certain
Demophantos, a usurer
living near Poikile. He had
never given me more than
five drachmas and he
pretended to be my man.
But his love was only
superficial, Chrysis. He
never sighed, he never shed
tears for me and he never
spent the night waiting at
