Confuse Desire and Reality—The Perfect Illusion • 303
something seems to validate this wish, they become emotional and irra-
tional, almost to the point of hallucination.
Remember to envelop them in your illusion slowly. Potemkin did not
start with grand spectacles, but with simple sights along the way, such as
grazing cattle. Then he brought them on land, heightening the drama, un-
til the calculated climax when the windows were flung open to reveal a
mighty war machine—actually a few thousand men and boats lined up in
such a way as to suggest many more. Like Potemkin, involve the target in
some kind of journey, physical or otherwise. The feeling of a shared adven-
ture is rife with fantasy associations. Make people feel that they are getting
to see and live out something that relates to their deepest yearnings and
they will see happy, prosperous villages where there are only facades.
Here the real journey through Potemkin's fairyland began. It
was like a dream—the waking dream of some magician who
had discovered the secret of materializing his visions. . . .
[Catherine] and her companions had left the world of reality
behind. . . . Their talk was of Iphigenia and the ancient
gods, and Catherine felt that she was both Alexander and
Cleopatra.
—GINA KAUS
Keys to Seduction
The real world can be unforgiving: events occur over which we have lit-
tle control, other people ignore our feelings in their quests to get what
they need, time runs out before we accomplish what we had wanted. If we
ever stopped to look at the present and future in a completely objective
way, we would despair. Fortunately we develop the habit of dreaming early
on. In this other, mental world that we inhabit, the future is full of rosy
possibilities. Perhaps tomorrow we will sell that brilliant idea, or meet the
person who will change our lives. Our culture stimulates these fantasies
with constant images and stories of marvelous occurrences and happy
romances.
The problem is, these images and fantasies exist only in our minds, or
on-screen. They really aren't enough—we crave the real thing, not this
endless daydreaming and titillation. Your task as a seducer is to bring some
flesh and blood into someone's fantasy life by embodying a fantasy figure,
or creating a scenario resembling that person's dreams. No one can resist
the pull of a secret desire that has come to life before their eyes. You must
first choose targets who have some repression or dream unrealized—always
the most likely victims of a seduction. Slowly and gradually, you will build
up the illusion that they are getting to see and feel and live those dreams of
theirs. Once they have this sensation they will lose contact with reality, and
begin to see your fantasy as more real than anything else. And once they
304 • The Art of Seduction
lose touch with reality, they are (to quote Stendhal on Lord Byron's female
victims) like roasted larks that fall into your mouth.
Most people have a misconception about illusion. As any magician
knows, it need not be built out of anything grand or theatrical; the grand
and theatrical can in fact be destructive, calling too much attention to you
and your schemes. Instead create the appearance of normality. Once your
targets feel secure—nothing is out of the ordinary—you have room to de-
ceive them. Pei Pu did not spin the lie about his gender immediately; he
took his time, made Bouriscout come to him. Once Bouriscout had fallen
for it, Pei Pu continued to wear men's clothes. In animating a fantasy, the
great mistake is imagining it must be larger than life. That would border on
camp, which is entertaining but rarely seductive. Instead, what you aim for
is what Freud called the "uncanny," something strange and familiar at the
same time, like a deja vu, or a childhood memory—anything slightly irra-
tional and dreamlike. The uncanny, the mix of the real and the unreal, has
immense power over our imaginations. The fantasies you bring to life for
your targets should not be bizarre or exceptional; they should be rooted in
reality, with a hint of the strange, the theatrical, the occult (in talk of des-
tiny, for example). You vaguely remind people of something in their child-
hood, or a character in a film or book. Even before Bouriscout heard Pei
Pu's story, he had the uncanny feeling of something remarkable and fantas-
tical in this normal-looking man. The secret to creating an uncanny effect
is to keep it subtle and suggestive.
Emma Hart came from a prosaic background, her father a country
blacksmith in eighteenth-century England. Emma was beautiful, but had
no other talents to her credit. Yet she rose to become one of the greatest
seductresses in history, seducing first Sir William Hamilton, the English
ambassador to the court of Naples, and then (as Lady Hamilton, Sir Wil-
liam's wife) Vice-Admiral Lord Nelson. What was strangest when you met
her was an uncanny sense that she was a figure from the past, a woman out
of Greek myth or ancient history. Sir William was a collector of Greek and
Roman antiquities; to seduce him, Emma cleverly made herself resemble a
Greek statue, and mythical figures in paintings of the time. It was not just
the way she wore her hair, or dressed, but her poses, the way she carried
herself. It was as if one of the paintings he collected had come to life. Soon
Sir William began to host parties in his home in Naples at which Emma
would wear costumes and pose, re-creating images from mythology and
history. Dozens of men fell in love with her, for she embodied an image
from their childhood, an image of beauty and perfection. The key to this
fantasy creation was some shared cultural association—mythology, historical
seductresses like Cleopatra. Every culture has a pool of such figures from
the distant and not-so-distant past. You hint at a similarity, in spirit and in
appearance—but you are flesh and blood. What could be more thrilling
than the sense of being in the presence of some fantasy figure going back
to your earliest memories?
One night Pauline Bonaparte, the sister of Napoleon, held a gala affair
