
The Soft Sell
Seduction is the ultimate form of power. Those who give in to it do so
willingly and happily. There is rarely any resentment on their part; they
forgive you any kind of manipulation because you have brought them plea-
sure, a rare commodity in the world. With such power at your fingertips,
though, why stop at the conquest of a man or woman? A crowd, an elec-
torate, a nation can be brought under your sway simply by applying on a
mass level the tactics that work so well on an individual. The only differ-
ence is the goal—not sex but influence, a vote, people's attention—and the
degree of tension. When you are after sex, you deliberately create anxiety, a
touch of pain, twists, and turns. Seduction on the mass level is more diffuse
and soft. Creating a constant titillation, you fascinate the masses with what
you are offering. They pay attention to you because it is pleasant to do so.
Let us say your goal is to sell yourself—as a personality, a trendsetter, a
candidate for office. There are two ways to go: the hard sell (the direct ap-
proach) and the soft sell (the indirect approach). In the hard sell you state
your case strongly and directly, explaining why your talents, your ideas,
your political message are superior to anyone else's. You tout your achieve-
ments, quote statistics, bring in expert opinions, even go so far as to induce
a bit of fear if the audience ignores your message. The approach is a tad ag-
gressive and might have unwanted consequences: some people will be of-
fended, resisting your message, even if what you say is true. Others will feel
you are manipulating them—who can trust experts and statistics, and why
are you trying so hard? You will also grate on people's nerves, becoming
unpleasant to listen to. In a world in which you cannot succeed without
selling to large numbers, the direct approach won't take you far.
The soft sell, on the other hand, has the potential to draw in millions
because it is entertaining, gentle on the ears, and can be repeated with-
out irritating people. The technique was invented by the great charlatans
of seventeenth-century Europe. To peddle their elixirs and alchemic
concoctions, they would first put on a show—clowns, music, vaudeville-
type routines—that had nothing to do with what they were selling. A
crowd would form, and as the audience laughed and relaxed, the charlatan
would come onstage and briefly and dramatically discuss the miraculous ef-
fects of the elixir. By honing this technique, the charlatans discovered that
instead of selling a few dozen bottles of the dubious medicine, they were
suddenly selling scores or even hundreds.
443
