The Calculated Surprise
In 1753, the twenty-eight-old Giovanni Casanova met a young girl
named Caterina with whom he fell in love. Her father knew what kind
of man Casanova was, and to prevent some mishap before he could marry
her off, he sent her away to a convent on the Venetian island of Murano,
where she was to remain for four years.
Casanova, however, was not one to be daunted. He smuggled letters to
Caterina. He began to attend Mass at the convent several times a week,
catching glimpses of her. The nuns began to talk among themselves: who
was this handsome young man who appeared so often? One morning, as
Casanova, leaving Mass, was about to board a gondola, a servant girl from
the convent passed by and dropped a letter at his feet. Thinking it might be
from Caterina, he picked it up. It was indeed intended for him, but it was
not from Caterina; its author was a nun at the convent, who had noticed
him on his many visits and wanted to make his acquaintance. Was he inter-
ested? If so, he should come to the convent's parlor at a particular time,
when the nun would be receiving a visitor from the outside world, a friend
of hers who was a countess. He could stand at a distance, observe her, and
decide whether she was to his liking.
Casanova was most intrigued by the letter: its style was dignified, but
there was something naughty about it as well—particularly from a nun. He
had to find out more. At the appointed day and time, he stood to the side
in the convent parlor and saw an elegantly dressed woman talking with a
nun seated behind a grating. He heard the nun's name mentioned, and was
astonished: it was Mathilde M., a well-known Venetian in her early twen-
ties, whose decision to enter a convent had surprised the whole city. But
what astonished him most was that beneath her nun's habit, he could see
that she was a beautiful young woman, particularly in her eyes, which were
a brilliant blue. Perhaps she needed a favor done, and intended that he
would serve as her cat's-paw.
His curiosity got the better of him. A few days later he returned to the
convent and asked to see her. As he waited for her, his heart was beating a
mile a minute—he did not know what to expect. She finally appeared and
sat down behind the grating. They were alone in the room, and she said
that she could arrange for them to have supper together at a little villa
nearby. Casanova was delighted, but wondered what kind of nun he was
dealing with. "And—have you no lover but me?" he asked. "I have aI count upon taking [the
French people] by surprise.
A bold deed upsets people's
equanimity, and they are
dumbfounded by a great
novelty.
—NAPOLEON BONAPARTE,
QUOTED IN EMIL LUDWIG,
NAPOLEON, TRANSLATED BY
EDEN AND CEDAR PAUL
The first care of any dandy
is to never do what one
expects them to do, to
always go beyond. . . .
The unexpected can be
nothing more than a
gesture, but a gesture that
is totally uncommon.
Alcibiades cut off the tail of
his dog in order to surprise
people. When he saw the
looks on his friends as they
gazed upon the mutilated
animal, he said: "Ah, that
is precisely what I wanted
to happen: as long as the
Athenians gossip about
this, they will not say
anything worse about me."
• Attracting attention is
not the only goal of a
dandy, he wants to hold it
by unexpected, even
ridiculous means. After
Alcibiades, how many
apprentice dandies cut off
the tails of their dogs! The
243
244 • The Art of Seduction
friend, who is also absolutely my master," she replied. "It is to him I owe
my wealth." She asked if he had a lover. Yes, he replied. She then said, in a
mysterious tone, "I warn you that if you once allow me to take her place in
your heart, no power on earth can tear me from it." She then gave him the
key to the villa and told him to meet her there in two nights. He kissed her
through the grating and left in a daze. "I passed the next two days in a state
of feverish impatience," he wrote, "which prevented me from sleeping or
eating. Over and above birth, beauty, and wit, my new conquest possessed
an additional charm: she was forbidden fruit. I was about to become a rival
of the Church." He imagined her in her habit, and with her shaven head.
He arrived at the villa at the appointed hour. Mathilde was waiting for
him. To his surprise, she wore an elegant dress, and somehow she had
avoided having her head shaved, for her hair was in a magnificent chignon.
Casanova began to kiss her. She resisted, but only slightly, and then pulled
back, saying a meal was ready for them. Over dinner she filled in a few
more of the gaps: her money allowed her to bribe certain people, so that
she could escape from the convent every so often. She had mentioned
Casanova to her friend and master, and he had approved their liaison. He
must be old? Casanova asked. No, she replied, a glint in her eye, he is in his
forties, and quite handsome. After supper, a bell rang—her signal to hurry
back to the convent, or she would be caught. She changed back into her
habit and left.
A beautiful vista now seemed to stretch before Casanova, of months
spent in the villa with this delightful creature, all of it courtesy of the mys-
terious master who paid for it all. He soon returned to the convent to
arrange the next meeting. They would rendezvous in a square in Venice,
then retire to the villa. At the appointed time and place, Casanova saw a
man approach him. Fearing it was her mysterious friend, or some other
man sent to kill him, he recoiled. The man circled behind him, then came
up close: it was Mathilde, wearing a mask and men's clothes. She laughed at
the fright she had given him. What a devilish nun. He had to admit that
dressed as a man she excited him even more.
Casanova began to suspect that all was not as it seemed. For one, he
found a collection of libertine novels and pamphlets in Mathilde's house.
Then she made blasphemous comments, for example about the joy they
would have together during Lent, "mortifying their flesh." Now she re-
ferred to her mysterious friend as her lover. A plan evolved in his mind to
take her away from this man and from the convent, eloping with her and
possessing her himself.
A few days later he received a letter from her, in which she made a con-
fession: during one of their more passionate trysts at the villa, her lover
had hidden in a closet, watching the whole thing. The lover, she told him,
was the French ambassador to Venice, and Casanova had impressed him.
Casanova was not one to be fooled with like this, yet the next day he was
back at the convent, submissively arranging for another tryst. This time she
showed up at the hour they had named, and he embraced her—only tobaron of Saint-Cricq, for
example, with his ice cream
boots: one very hot day, he
ordered at Tortonis two ice
creams, the vanilla served
in his right boot, the
strawberry in his left
boot. . . . The Count
Saint-Germain loved to
bring his friends to the
theater, in his voluptuous
carriage lined in pink satin
and drawn by two black
horses with enormous tails;
he asked his friends in that
inimitable tone of his:
"Which piece of
entertainment did you wish
to see? Vaudeville, the
Variety show, the Palais-
Royal theater? I took the
liberty of purchasing a box
for all three of them."
Once the choice was made,
with a look of great
disdain, he would take the
unused tickets, roll them
up, and use them to light
his cigar.
—MAUD DE BELLEROCHE,
DU DANDY AU PLAY-BOY
While Shahzaman sat at
one of the windows
overlooking the king's
garden, he saw a door open
in the palace, through
which came twenty slave
girls and twenty negroes.
In their midst was his
brother's [King
Shahriyar's] queen, a
woman of surpassing
beauty. They made their
way to the fountain, where
they all undressed and sat
on the grass. The king's
wife then called out:
"Come Mass'ood!" and
there promptly came to her
a black slave, who mounted
her after smothering her
with embraces and kisses.
So also did the negroes
with the slave girls, reveling
together till the approach of
night. ...•... And so
