The Tantalizing Object
Some time in the 1880s, a gentleman named Don Juan de Todellas was
wandering through a park in Madrid when he saw a woman in her early
twenties getting out of a coach, followed by a two-year-old child and a
nursemaid. The young woman was elegantly dressed, but what took Don
Juan's breath away was her resemblance to a woman he had known nearly
three years before. Surely she could not be the same person. The woman he
had known, Cristeta Moreruela, was a showgirl in a second-rate theater.
She had been an orphan and was quite poor—her circumstances could not
have changed that much. He moved closer: the same beautiful face. And
then he heard her voice. He was so shocked that he had to sit down: it was
indeed the same woman.
Don Juan was an incorrigible seducer, whose conquests were innu-
merable and of every variety. But he remembered his affair with Cristeta
quite clearly, because she had been so young—the most charming girl he
had ever met. He had seen her in the theater, had courted her assiduously,
and had managed to persuade her to take a trip with him to a seaside town.
Although they had separate rooms, nothing could stop Don Juan: he made
up a story about business troubles, gained her sympathy, and in a tender
moment took advantage of her weakness. A few days later he left her, on
the pretext that he had to attend to business. He believed he would never
see her again. Feeling a little guilty—a rare occurrence with him—he sent
her 5,000 pesetas, pretending he would eventually rejoin her. Instead he
went to Paris. He had only recently returned to Madrid.
As he sat and remembered all this, an idea troubled him: the child.
Could the boy possibly be his? If not, she must have married almost imme-
diately after their affair. How could she do such a thing? She was obviously
wealthy now. Who could her husband be? Did he know her past? Mixed
with his confusion was intense desire. She was so young and beautiful. Why
had he given her up so easily? Somehow, even if she was married, he had to
get her back.
Don Juan began to frequent the park every day. He saw her a few more
times; their eyes met, but she pretended not to notice him. Tracing the
nursemaid during one of her errands, he struck up a conversation with her,
and asked her about her mistress's husband. She told him the man's name
was Señor Martínez, and that he was away on an extended business trip; she
also told him where Cristeta now lived. Don Juan gave her a note to give toFor these two crimes
Tantalus was punished
with the ruin of his
kingdom and, after his
death by Zeus's own hand,
with eternal torment in the
company of Ixion,
Sisyphus, Tityus, the
Danaids, and others. Now
he hangs, perennially
consumed by thirst and
hunger, from the bough of
a fruit tree which leans over
a marshy lake. Its waves
lap against his waist, and
sometimes reach his chin,
yet whenever he bends
down to drink, they slip
away, and nothing remains
but the black mud at his
feet; or, if he ever succeeds
in scooping up a handful of
water, it slips through his
fingers before he can do
more than wet his cracked
lips, leaving him thirstier
than ever. The tree is laden
with pears, shining apples,
sweet figs, ripe olives and
pomegranates, which
dangle against his
shoulders; but whenever he
reaches for the luscious
fruit, a gust of wind whirls
them out of his reach.
—ROBERT GRAVES, THE GREEK
MYTHS, VOLUME 2
231
232 • The Art of Seduction
her mistress. Then he strolled by Cristeta's house—a beautiful palace. His
worst suspicions were confirmed: she had married for money.
Cristeta refused to see him. He persisted, sending more notes. Finally,
to avoid a scene, she agreed to meet him, just once, in the park. He pre-
pared for the meeting carefully: seducing her again would be a delicate op-
eration. But when he saw her coming toward him, in her beautiful clothes,
his emotions, and his lust, got the better of him. She could only belong to
him, never to another man, he told her. Cristeta took offense at this; obvi-
ously her present circumstances prevented even one more meeting. Still,
beneath her coolness he could sense strong emotions. He begged to see her
again, but she left without promising anything. He sent her more letters,
meanwhile wracking his brains trying to piece it all together: Who was this
Señor Martínez? Why would he marry a showgirl? How could Cristeta be
wrested away from him?
Finally Cristeta agreed to meet Don Juan one more time, in the theater,
where he dared not risk a scandal. They took a box, where they could talk.
She reassured him the child was not his. She said he only wanted her now
because she belonged to another, because he could not have her. No, he
said, he had changed; he would do anything to get her back. Disconcert-
ingly, at moments her eyes seemed to be flirting with him. But then she
seemed to be about to cry, and rested her head on his shoulder—only to
get up immediately, as if realizing this was a mistake. This was their last
meeting, she said, and quickly fled. Don Juan was beside himself. She was
playing with him; she was a coquette. He had only been claiming to have
changed, but perhaps it was true: no woman had ever treated him this way
before. He would never have allowed it.
For the next few nights Don Juan slept poorly. All he could think about
was Cristeta. He had nightmares about killing her husband, about growing
old and being alone. It was all too much. He had to leave town. He sent
her a goodbye note, and to his amazement, she replied: she wanted to see
him, she had something to tell him. By now he was too weak to resist. As
she had requested, he met her on a bridge, at night. This time she made no
effort to control herself: yes, she still loved Don Juan, and was ready to run
away with him. But he should come to her house tomorrow, in broad day-
light, and take her away. There could be no secrecy.
Beside himself with joy, Don Juan agreed to her demands. The next day
he showed up at her palace at the appointed hour, and asked for Señora
Martinez. There was no one there by that name, said the woman at the
door. Don Juan insisted: her name is Cristeta. Ah, Cristeta, the woman said:
she lives in the back, with the other tenants. Confused, Don Juan went to
the back of the palace. There he thought he saw her son, playing in the
street in dirty clothes. But no, he said to himself, it must be some other
child. He came to Cristeta's door, and instead of her servant, Cristeta herself
opened it. He entered. It was the room of a poor person. Hanging on im-
provised racks, however, were Cristeta's elegant clothes. As if in a dream, he
sat down, dumbfounded, and listened as Cristeta revealed the truth.Don Juan: Arminta, listen
to the truth—-for are not
women friends of truth? I
am a nobleman, heir to the
ancient family of the
Tenorios, the conquerors of
Seville. After the king, my
father is the most powerful
and considered man at
court. . . . By chance I
happened on this road and
saw you. Love sometimes
behaves in a manner that
surprises even himself. . . .
• Arminta: I don't know if
what you're saying is truth
or lying rhetoric. I am
married to Batricio,
everybody knows it. How
can the marriage be
annulled, even if he
abandons me? • Don Juan:
When the marriage is not
consummated, whether by
malice or deceit, it can be
annulled. . . . • Arminta:
You are right. But, God
help me, won't you desert
me the moment you have
separated me from my
husband? . . . • Don
Juan: Arminta, light of my
eyes, tomorrow your
beautiful feet will slip into
polished silver slippers with
buttons of the purest gold.
And your alabaster throat
will be imprisoned in
beautiful necklaces; on
your fingers, rings set with
amethysts will shine like
stars, and from your ears
will da ngle orien tal pearls.
• Arminta: I am yours.
—TIRSO DE MOLINA,
THE PLAYBOY OF SEVILLE,
TRANSLATED BY ADRIENNE M.
SCHIZZANO AND OSCAR
MANDLL, IN MANDEL, ED.,
THE THEATRE OF DON JUAN
Now the serpent was more
subtle than any other wild
creature that the LORD
GOD had made. He said
to the woman, "Did God
say, 'You shall not cat of
