Preface • xxiii
son's skin, to see the world through their eyes. The reasons for this are sev-
eral. First, self-absorption is a sign of insecurity; it is anti-seductive. Every-
one has insecurities, but seducers manage to ignore them, finding therapy
for moments of self-doubt by being absorbed in the world. This gives them
a buoyant spirit—we want to be around them. Second, getting into some-
one's skin, imagining what it is like to be them, helps the seducer gather
valuable information, learn what makes that person tick, what will make
them lose their ability to think straight and fall into a trap. Armed with
such information, they can provide focused and individualized attention—a
rare commodity in a world in which most people see us only from behind
the screen of their own prejudices. Getting into the targets' skin is the first
important tactical move in the war of penetration.
Seducers see themselves as providers of pleasure, like bees that gather
pollen from some flowers and deliver it to others. As children we mostly
devoted our lives to play and pleasure. Adults often have feelings of being
cut off from this paradise, of being weighed down by responsibilities. The
seducer knows that people are waiting for pleasure—they never get enough
of it from friends and lovers, and they cannot get it by themselves. A person
who enters their lives offering adventure and romance cannot be resisted.
Pleasure is a feeling of being taken past our limits, of being overwhelmed—
by another person, by an experience. People are dying to be overwhelmed,
to let go of their usual stubbornness. Sometimes their resistance to us is
a way of saying, Please seduce me. Seducers know that the possibility of
pleasure will make a person follow them, and the experience of it will
make someone open up, weak to the touch. They also train themselves to
be sensitive to pleasure, knowing that feeling pleasure themselves will make
it that much easier for them to infect the people around them.
A seducer sees all of life as theater, everyone an actor. Most people feel
they have constricted roles in life, which makes them unhappy. Seducers,
on the other hand, can be anyone and can assume many roles. (The arche-
type here is the god Zeus, insatiable seducer of young maidens, whose
main weapon was the ability to assume the form of whatever person or ani-
mal would most appeal to his victim.) Seducers take pleasure in performing
and are not weighed down by their identity, or by some need to be them-
selves, or to be natural. This freedom of theirs, this fluidity in body and
spirit, is what makes them attractive. What people lack in life is not more
reality but illusion, fantasy, play. The clothes that seducers wear, the places
they take you to, their words and actions, are slightly heightened—not
overly theatrical but with a delightful edge of unreality, as if the two of you
were living out a piece of fiction or were characters in a film. Seduction is
a kind of theater in real life, the meeting of illusion and reality.
Finally, seducers are completely amoral in their approach to life. It is all
a game, an arena for play. Knowing that the moralists, the crabbed repressed
types who croak about the evils of the seducer, secretly envy their power,
they do not concern themselves with other people's opinions. They do not
deal in moral judgments—nothing could be less seductive. Everything isThe disaffection, neurosis,
anguish and frustration
encountered by
psychoanalysis comes no
doubt from being unable to
love or to be loved, from
being unable to give or take
pleasure, but the radical
disenchantment comes from
seduction and its failure.
Only those who lie
completely outside
seduction are ill, even if
they remain fully capable of
loving and making love.
Psychoanalysis believes it
treats the disorder of sex
and desire, but in reality it
is dealing with the
disorders of seduction. . . .
The most serious
deficiencies always concern
charm and not pleasure,
enchantment and not some
vital or sexual satisfaction.
—JEAN BAUDRILLARD,
SEDUCTION
Whatever is done from love
always occurs beyond good
and evil.
—FRIEDRICH NIETZSCHE,
BEYOND GOOD AND EVIL,
TRANSLATED BY WALTER
KAUFMANN
xxiv • Preface
pliant, fluid, like life itself. Seduction is a form of deception, but people
want to be led astray, they yearn to be seduced. If they didn't, seducers
would not find so many willing victims. Get rid of any moralizing tenden-
cies, adopt the seducer's playful philosophy, and you will find the rest of the
process easy and natural.
The Art of Seduction is designed to arm you with weapons of persuasion and
charm, so that those around you will slowly lose their ability to resist with-
out knowing how or why it has happened. It is an art of war for delicate
times.
Every seduction has two elements that you must analyze and under-
stand: first, yourself and what is seductive about you; and second, your tar-
get and the actions that will penetrate their defenses and create surrender.
The two sides are equally important. If you strategize without paying at-
tention to the parts of your character that draw people to you, you will be
seen as a mechanical seducer, slimy and manipulative. If you rely on your
seductive personality without paying attention to the other person, you will
make terrible mistakes and limit your potential.
Consequently, The Art of Seduction is divided into two parts. The first
half, "The Seductive Character," describes the nine types of seducer, plus
the Anti-Seducer. Studying these types will make you aware of what is
inherently seductive in your character, the basic building block of any se-
duction. The second half, "The Seductive Process," includes the twenty-
four maneuvers and strategies that will instruct you on how to create a
spell, break down people's resistance, give movement and force to your
seduction, and induce surrender in your target. As a kind of bridge be-
tween the two parts, there is a chapter on the eighteen types of victims of a
seduction—each of them missing something from their lives, each cradling
an emptiness you can fill. Knowing what type you are dealing with will
help you put into practice the ideas in both sections. Ignore any part of this
book and you will be an incomplete seducer.
The ideas and strategies in The Art of Seduction are based on the writings
and historical accounts of the most successful seducers in history. The
sources include the seducers' own memoirs (by Casanova, Errol Flynn, Na-
talie Barney, Marilyn Monroe); biographies (of Cleopatra, Josephine Bona-
parte, John F. Kennedy, Duke Ellington); handbooks on the subject (most
notably Ovid's Art of Love); and fictional accounts of seductions (Choderlos
de Laclos's Dangerous Liaisons, Søren Kierkegaard's The Seducer's Diary,
Murasaki Shikibu's The Tale of Genji). The heroes and heroines of these lit-
erary works are generally modeled on real-life seducers. The strategies they
employ reveal the intimate connection between fiction and seduction, cre-
ating illusion and leading a person along. In putting the book's lessons into
practice, you will be following in the path of the greatest masters of the art.
Finally, the spirit that will make you a consummate seducer is the spirit
in which you should read this book. The French writer Denis Diderot
once wrote, "I give my mind the liberty to follow the first wise or foolishShould anyone here in
Rome lack finesse at love-
making, \ Let him \ Try
me—read my book, and
results are guaranteed! \
Technique is the secret.
Charioteer, sailor,
oarsman, \ All need it.
Technique can control \
Love himself.
—OVID, THE ART OF LOVE,
TRANSLATED BY PETER GREEN
