98 • The Art of Seduction
ologist Max Weber, however, noticed that despite our supposed progress,
there were more Charismatics than ever. What characterized a modern
Charismatic, according to Weber, was the appearance of an extraordinary
quality in their character, the equivalent of a sign of God's favor. How else
to explain the power of a Robespierre or a Lenin? More than anything it
was the force of their magnetic personalities that made these men stand out
and was the source of their power. They did not speak of God but of a
great cause, visions of a future society. Their appeal was emotional; they
seemed possessed. And their audiences reacted as euphorically as earlier au-
diences had to a prophet. When Lenin died, in 1924, a cult formed around
his memory, transforming the communist leader into a deity.
Today, anyone who has presence, who attracts attention when he or she
enters a room, is said to possess charisma. But even these less-exalted types
reveal a trace of the quality suggested by the word's original meaning.
Their charisma is mysterious and inexplicable, never obvious. They have an
unusual confidence. They have a gift—often a smoothness with language—
that makes them stand out from the crowd. They express a vision. We may
not realize it, but in their presence we have a kind of religious experience:
we believe in these people, without having any rational evidence for doing
so. When trying to concoct an effect of charisma, never forget the religious
source of its power. You must radiate an inward quality that has a saintly or
spiritual edge to it. Your eyes must glow with the fire of a prophet. Your
charisma must seem natural, as if it came from something mysteriously be-
yond your control, a gift of the gods. In our rational, disenchanted world,
people crave a religious experience, particularly on a group level. Any sign
of charisma plays to this desire to believe in something. And there is noth-
ing more seductive than giving people something to believe in and follow.
Charisma must seem mystical, but that does not mean you cannot learn
certain tricks that will enhance the charisma you already possess, or will
give you the outward appearance of it. The following are basic qualities
that will help create the illusion of charisma:
Purpose. If people believe you have a plan, that you know where you are
going, they will follow you instinctively. The direction does not matter:
pick a cause, an ideal, a vision and show that you will not sway from your
goal. People will imagine that your confidence comes from something
real—just as the ancient Hebrews believed Moses was in communion with
God, simply because he showed the outward signs.
Purposefulness is doubly charismatic in times of trouble. Since most
people hesitate before taking bold action (even when action is what is re-
quired), single-minded self-assurance will make you the focus of attention.
People will believe in you through the simple force of your character. When
Franklin Delano Roosevelt came to power amidst the Depression, much of
the public had little faith he could turn things around. But in his first few
months in office he displayed such confidence, such decisiveness and clarityAnd the Lord said to
Moses, "Write these
words; in accordance with
these words I have made a
covenant with you and
with Israel." And he was
there with the Lord forty
days and forty nights; he
neither ate bread nor drank
water. And he wrote upon
the tables the words of the
covenant, the ten
commandments. When
Moses came down from
Mount Sinai, with the two
tables of the testimony in
his hand as he came down
from the mountain, Moses
did not know that the skin
of his face shone because he
had been talking with
God. And when Aaron
and all the people of Israel
saw Moses, behold, the
skin of his face shone, and
they were afraid to come
near him. But Moses
called to them; and Aaron
and all the leaders of the
congregation returned to
him, and Moses talked
with them. And afterward
all the people of Israel came
near, and he gave them in
commandment all that the
Lord had spoken with him
in Mount Sinai. And
when Moses had finished
speaking with them, he put
a veil on his face; but
whenever Moses went in
before the Lord to speak
with him, he took the veil
off, until he came out; and
when he came out, and
told the people of Israel
what he was commanded,
the people of Israel saw the
face of Moses, that the skin
of Moses's face shone; and
Moses would put the veil
upon his face again, until
he went in to speak
with him.
—EXODUS 34:27 OLD
TESTAMENT
The Charismatic • 99
in dealing with the country's many problems, that the public began to see
him as their savior, someone with intense charisma.
Mystery. Mystery lies at charisma's heart, but it is a particular kind of
mystery—a mystery expressed by contradiction. The Charismatic may be
both proletarian and aristocratic (Mao Zedong), both cruel and kind (Peter
the Great), both excitable and icily detached (Charles de Gaulle), both inti-
mate and distant (Sigmund Freud). Since most people are predictable, the
effect of these contradictions is devastatingly charismatic. They make you
hard to fathom, add richness to your character, make people talk about you.
It is often better to reveal your contradictions slowly and subtly—if you
throw them out one on top of the other, people may think you have an er-
ratic personality. Show your mysteriousness gradually and word will spread.
You must also keep people at arm's length, to keep them from figuring
you out.
Another aspect of mystery is a hint of the uncanny. The appearance of
prophetic or psychic gifts will add to your aura. Predict things authorita-
tively and people will often imagine that what you have said has come true.
Saintliness. Most of us must compromise constantly to survive; saints do
not. They must live out their ideals without caring about the consequences.
The saintly effect bestows charisma.
Saintliness goes far beyond religion: politicians as disparate as George
Washington and Lenin won saintly reputations by living simply, despite
their power—by matching their political values to their personal lives. Both
men were virtually deified after they died. Albert Einstein too had a saintly
aura—childlike, unwilling to compromise, lost in his own world. The key
is that you must already have some deeply held values; that part cannot be
faked, at least not without risking accusations of charlatanry that will de-
stroy your charisma in the long run. The next step is to show, as simply and
subtly as possible, that you live what you believe. Finally, the appearance of
being mild and unassuming can eventually turn into charisma, as long as
you seem completely comfortable with it. The source of Harry Truman's
charisma, and even of Abraham Lincoln's, was to appear to be an Everyman.That devil of a man
exercises a fascination on
me that I cannot explain
even to myself, and in such
a degree that, though I fear
neither God nor devil,
when I am in his presence
I am ready to tremble like
a child, and he could make
me go through the eye of a
needle to throw myself into
the fire.
—GENERAL VANDAMME, ON
NAPOLEON BONAPARTE
[The masses] have never
thirsted after truth. They
demand illusions, and
cannot do without them.
They constantly give what
is unreal precedence over
what is real; they are
almost as strongly
influenced by what is
untrue as by what is true.
They have an evident
tendency not to distinguish
between the two.
—SIGMUND FREUD, THE
STANDARD EDITION OFTHE
COMPLETE PSYCHOLOGICAL
WORKS OF SIGMUND FREUD,
VOLUME I8
Eloquence. A Charismatic relies on the power of words. The reason is
simple: words are the quickest way to create emotional disturbance. They
can uplift, elevate, stir anger, without referring to anything real. During the
Spanish Civil War, Dolores Gómez Ibarruri, known as La Pasionaria, gave
pro-Communist speeches that were so emotionally powerful as to deter-
mine several key moments in the war. To bring off this kind of eloquence,
it helps if the speaker is as emotional, as caught up in words, as the audi-
ence is. Yet eloquence can be learned: the devices La Pasionaria used—
