374 • The Art of Seduction
quickly turns back into tears. Jealousy and humiliation then precede the fi-
nal moment when she gives him her virginity. (Even after this, according to
the story, she finds ways to continue to torment him.) Each low she
inspires—guilt, despair, jealousy, emptiness—creates the space for a more
intense high. He becomes an addict, hooked on the alternation of charge
and withdrawal.
Your seduction should never follow a simple course upward toward
pleasure and harmony. The climax will come too soon, and the pleasure
will be weak. What makes us intensely appreciate something is previous
suffering. A brush with death makes us fall in love with life; a long journey
makes a return home that much more pleasurable. Your task is to create
moments of sadness, despair, and anguish, to create the tension that allows
for a great release. Do not worry about making people angry; anger is a
sure sign that you have your hooks in them. Nor should you be afraid that
if you make yourself difficult people will flee—we only abandon those
who bore us. The ride on which you take your victims can be tortuous but
never dull. At all costs, keep your targets emotional and on edge. Create
enough highs and lows and you will wear away the last vestiges of their
willpower.
Harshness and Kindness
In 1972, Henry Kissinger, then President Richard Nixon's assistant for
national security affairs, received a request for an interview from the fa-
mous Italian journalist Oriana Fallaci. Kissinger rarely gave interviews; he
had no control over the final product, and he was a man who needed to be
in control. But he had read Fallaci's interview with a North Vietnamese
general, and it had been instructive. She was extremely well informed on
the Vietnam War; perhaps he could gather some information of his own,
pick her brain. He decided to ask for a preinterview, a preliminary meeting.
He would grill her on different subjects; if she passed the test, he would
grant her an interview proper. They met, and he was impressed; she was
extremely intelligent—and tough. It would be an enjoyable challenge to
outwit her and prove that he was tougher. He agreed to a short interview a
few days later.
To Kissinger's annoyance, Fallaci began the interview by asking him
whether he was disappointed by the slow pace of the peace negotiations
with North Vietnam. He would not discuss the negotiations—he had made
that clear in the preinterview. Yet she continued the same line of question-
ing. He grew a little angry "That's enough," he said. "I don't want to
talk any more about Vietnam." Although she didn't immediately aban-
don the subject, her questions became gentler: what were his personal feel-
ings toward the leaders of South and North Vietnam? Still, he ducked:
"I'm not the kind of person to be swayed by emotion. Emotions serve
no purpose." She moved to grander philosophical issues—war, peace. Shetrample you mercilessly. " •
"Madam!" • "You do not
know me yet. I admit that
I am cruel—since the word
gives you so much
delight—but am I not
entitled to be so? It is man
who desires, woman who is
desired; this is woman's
only advantage, but it is a
decisive one. By making
man so vulnerable to
passion, nature has placed
him at woman's mercy, and
she who has not the sense
to treat him like a humble
subject, a slave, a
plaything, and finally to
betray him with a laugh—
well, she is a woman of
little wisdom." • "My
dear, your principles . . ."
I protested. • "Are
founded on the experience
of a thousand years," she
replied mischievously,
running her white fingers
through the dark fur. "The
more submissive woman is,
the more readily man
recovers his self-possession
and becomes domineering;
but the more cruel and
faithless she is, the more
she ill-treats him, the
more wantonly she toys
with him and the harsher
she is, the more she
quickens his desire and
secures his love and
admiration. It has always
been so, from the time of
Helen and Delilah all the
way to Catherine the
Great and Lola Montez. "
—LEOPOLD VON SACHER-
MASOCH, VENUS IN FURS,
TRANSLATED BY JEAN MCNEIL
In essence, the domain
of eroticism is the domain of
violence, of violation. . . .
The whole business of
eroticism is to strike to the
inmost core of the living
being, so that the heart
stands still. . . . The
Mix Pleasure with Pain • 375
praised him for his role in the rapprochement with China. Without real-
izing it, Kissinger began to open up. He talked of the pain he felt in dealing
with Vietnam, the pleasures of wielding power. Then suddenly the harsher
questions returned—was he simply Nixon's lackey, as many suspected? Up
and down she went, alternately baiting and flattering him. His goal had
been to pump her for information while revealing nothing about himself;
by the end, though, she had given him nothing, while he had revealed a
range of embarrassing opinions—his view of women as playthings, for in-
stance, and his belief that he was popular with the public because people
saw him as a kind of lonesome cowboy, the hero who cleans things up by
himself. When the interview was published, Nixon, Kissinger's boss, was
livid about it.
In 1973, the Shah of Iran, Mohammed Riza Pahlavi, granted Fallaci an
interview. He knew how to handle the press—be noncommittal, speak in
generalities, seem firm, yet polite. This approach had worked a thousand
times before. Fallaci began the interview on a personal level, asking how it
felt to be a king, to be the target of assassination attempts, and why the
shah always seemed so sad. He talked of the burdens of his position, the
pain and loneliness he felt. It seemed a release of sorts to talk about his pro-
fessional problems. As he talked, Fallaci said little, her silence goading him
on. Then she suddenly changed the subject: he was having difficulties with
his second wife. Surely that must hurt him? This was a sore spot, and
Pahlavi got angry. He tried to change the subject, but she kept returning to
it. Why waste time talking about wives and women, he said. He then went
so far as to criticize women in general—their lack of creativity, their cru-
elty. Fallaci kept at him: he had dictatorial tendencies and his country
lacked basic freedoms. Fallaci's own books were on his government's black-
list. Hearing this, the shah seemed somewhat taken aback—perhaps he was
dealing with a subversive writer. But then she softened her tone again,
asked him about his many achievements. The pattern repeated: the mo-
ment he relaxed, she blindsided him with a sharp question; when he grew
bitter, she lightened the mood. Like Kissinger, he found himself opening
up despite himself and mentioning things he would later regret, such as his
intention to raise the price of oil. Slowly he fell under her spell, even began
to flirt with her. "Even if you're on the blacklist of my authorities," he said
at the end of the interview, "I'll put you on the white list of my heart."
Interpretation. Most of Fallaci's interviews were with powerful leaders,
men and women with an overwhelming need to control the situation, to
avoid revealing anything embarrassing. This put her and her subjects in con-
flict, since getting them to open up—grow emotional, give up control—
was exactly what she wanted. The classic seductive approach of charm and
flattery would get her nowhere with these people; they would see right
through it. Instead, Fallaci preyed on their emotions, alternating harshness
and kindness. She would ask a cruel question that touched on the deepestwhole business of
eroticism is to destroy the
self-contained character of
the participators as they are
in their normal lives. . . .
We ought never to forget
that in spite of the bliss
love promises its first effect
is one of turmoil and
distress. Passion fulfilled
itself provokes such violent
agitation that the
happiness involved, before
being a happiness to be
enjoyed, is so great as to be
more like its opposite,
suffering. . . . The
likelihood of suffering is all
the greater since suffering
alone reveals the total
significance of the beloved
object.
—GEORGES BATAILLE,
EROTISM: DEATH AND
SENSUALITY, TRANSLATED BY
MARY DALWOOD
Always a little doubt to set
at rest—that's what keeps
one craving in passionate
love. Because the keenest
misgivings are always
there, its pleasures never
become tedious. • Saint-
Simon, the only historian
France has ever possessed,
says: "After many passing
fancies the Duchesse de
Berry had fallen deeply in
love with Riom, a junior
member of the d'Aydie
family, the son of one of
Madame de Biron's sisters.
He had neither looks nor
brains; he was fat, short,
chubby-cheeked, pale, and
had such a crop of pimples
that he seemed one large
abscess; he had beautiful
teeth, but not the least idea
that he was going to inspire
a passion which quickly got
out of control, a passion
which lasted a lifetime,
notwithstanding a number
of subsidiary flirtations and
affairs. . . . • He would
