92 • The Art of Seduction
mood. Enter their spirit. Inwardly, calculate and wait: your surrender is a
strategy, not a way of life. When the time comes, and it inevitably will, the
tables will turn. Their aggression will land them in trouble, and that will
put you in a position to rescue them, regaining superiority. (You could also
decide that you had had enough, and consign them to oblivion.) Your
charm has prevented them from foreseeing this or growing suspicious. A
whole revolution can be enacted without a single act of violence, simply by
waiting for the apple to ripen and fall.
Symbol: The
Mirror. Your spirit holds a mirror up
to others. When they see you they see them-
selves: their values, their tastes, even their flaws. Their
lifelong love affair with their own image is comfortable and
hypnotic; so feed it. No one ever sees what is behind the mirror.
The Charmer • 93
Dangers
There are those who are immune to a Charmer; particularly cynics, and
confident types who do not need validation. These people tend to
view Charmers as slippery and deceitful, and they can make problems for
you. The solution is to do what most Charmers do by nature: befriend and
charm as many people as possible. Secure your power through numbers and
you will not have to worry about the few you cannot seduce. Catherine the
Great's kindness to everyone she met created a vast amount of good will
that paid off later. Also, it is sometimes charming to reveal a strategic flaw.
There is one person you dislike? Confess it openly, do not try to charm
such an enemy, and people will think you more human, less slippery. Dis-
raeli had such a scapegoat with his great nemesis, William Gladstone.
The dangers of political charm are harder to handle: your conciliatory,
shifting, flexible approach to politics will make enemies out of everyone
who is a rigid believer in a cause. Social seducers such as Bill Clinton and
Henry Kissinger could often win over the most hardened opponent with
their personal charm, but they could not be everywhere at once. Many
members of the English Parliament thought Disraeli a shifty conniver; in
person his engaging manner could dispel such feelings, but he could not
address the entire Parliament one-on-one. In difficult times, when people
yearn for something substantial and firm, the political charmer may be in
danger.
As Catherine the Great proved, timing is everything. Charmers must
know when to hibernate and when the times are ripe for their persuasive
powers. Known for their flexibility, they should sometimes be flexible
enough to act inflexibly. Zhou Enlai, the consummate chameleon, could
play the hard-core Communist when it suited him. Never become the slave
to your own powers of charm; keep it under control, something you can
turn off and on at will.
