58 • The Art of Seduction
Examples of Natural Seducers
1. As a child growing up in England, Charlie Chaplin spent years in dire
poverty, particularly after his mother was committed to an asylum. In his
early teens, forced to work to live, he landed a job in vaudeville, eventually
gaining some success as a comedian. But Chaplin was wildly ambitious, and
so, in 1910, when he was only nineteen, he emigrated to the United States,
hoping to break into the film business. Making his way to Hollywood, he
found occasional bit parts, but success seemed elusive: the competition was
fierce, and although Chaplin had a repertoire of gags that he had learned in
vaudeville, he did not particularly excel at physical humor, a critical part of
silent comedy. He was not a gymnast like Buster Keaton.
In 1914, Chaplin managed to get the lead in a film short called Making
a Living. His role was that of a con artist. In playing around with the cos-
tume for the part, he put on a pair of pants several sizes too large, then
added a derby hat, enormous boots that he wore on the wrong feet, a walk-
ing cane, and a pasted-on mustache. With the clothes, a whole new charac-
ter seemed to come to life—first the silly walk, then the twirling of the
cane, then all sorts of gags. Mack Sennett, the head of the studio, did not
find Making a Living very funny, and doubted whether Chaplin had a future
in the movies, but a few critics felt otherwise. A review in a trade magazine
read, "The clever player who takes the role of a nervy and very nifty
sharper in this picture is a comedian of the first water, who acts like one of
Nature's own naturals." And audiences also responded—the film made
money.
What seemed to touch a nerve in Making a Living, setting Chaplin apart
from the horde of other comedians working in silent film, was the almost
pathetic naiveté of the character he played. Sensing he was onto something,
Chaplin shaped the role further in subsequent movies, rendering him more
and more naive. The key was to make the character seem to see the world
through the eyes of a child. In The Bank, he is the bank janitor who day-
dreams of great deeds while robbers are at work in the building; in The
Pawnbroker, he is an unprepared shop assistant who wreaks havoc on a
grandfather clock; in Shoulder Arms, he is a soldier in the bloody trenches of
World War I, reacting to the horrors of war like an innocent child. Chaplin
made sure to cast actors in his films who were physically larger than he was,
subliminally positioning them as adult bullies and himself as the helpless in-
fant. And as he went deeper into his character, something strange hap-
pened: the character and the real-life man began to merge. Although he
had had a troubled childhood, he was obsessed with it. (For his film Easy
Street he built a set in Hollywood that duplicated the London streets he had
known as a boy.) He mistrusted the adult world, preferring the company of
the young, or the young at heart: three of his four wives were teenagers
when he married them.
More than any other comedian, Chaplin aroused a mix of laughter and
sentiment. He made you empathize with him as the victim, feel sorry for• "Agreed," said Hermes,
and they shook hands on
it. • . . . Apollo, taking
the child back to Olympus,
told Zeus all that had
happened. Zeus warned
Hermes that henceforth he
must respect the rights oj
property and refrain from
telling downright lies; but
he could not help being
amused. "You seem to be a
very ingenious, eloquent,
and persuasive godling," he
said. • "Then make me
your herald, Father,"
Hermes answered, "and I
will he responsible for the
safety of all divine
property, and never tell lies,
though I cannot promise
always to tell the whole
truth." • "That would not
be expected of you," said
Zeus with a smile. . . .
Zeus gave him a herald's
staff with white ribbons,
which everyone was ordered
to respect; a round hat
against the rain, and
winged golden sandals
which carried him about
with the swiftness of the
wind.
—ROBERT GRAVES,
THE GREEK MYTHS, VOLUME I
A man may meet a woman
and be shocked by her
ugliness. Soon, if she is
natural and unaffected, her
expression makes him
overlook the fault of her
features. He begins to find
her charming, it enters his
head that she might be
loved, and a week later he
is living in hope. The
following week he has been
snubbed into despair, and
the week afterwards he has
gone mad.
—STENDHAL, LOVE,
TRANSLATED BY GILBERT AND
SUZANNE SALE
The Natural • 59
him the way you would for a lost dog. You both laughed and cried. And
audiences sensed that the role Chaplin played came from somewhere deep
inside—that he was sincere, that he was actually playing himself. Within
a few years after Making a Living, Chaplin was the most famous actor
in the world. There were Chaplin dolls, comic books, toys; popular songs
and short stories were written about him; he became a universal icon. In
1921, when he returned to London for the first time since he had left it, he
was greeted by enormous crowds, as if at the triumphant return of a great
general.
The greatest seducers, those who seduce mass audiences, nations, the
world, have a way of playing on people's unconscious, making them react
in a way they can neither understand nor control. Chaplin inadvertently hit
on this power when he discovered the effect he could have on audiences by
playing up his weakness, by suggesting that he had a child's mind in an adult
body. In the early twentieth century, the world was radically and rapidly
changing. People were working longer and longer hours at increasingly
mechanical jobs; life was becoming steadily more inhuman and heartless, as
the ravages of World War I made clear. Caught in the midst of revolution-
ary change, people yearned for a lost childhood that they imagined as a
golden paradise.
An adult child like Chaplin has immense seductive power, for he offers
the illusion that life was once simpler and easier, and that for a moment, or
for as long as the movie lasts, you can win that life back. In a cruel, amoral
world, naivete has enormous appeal. The key is to bring it off with an air
of total seriousness, as the straight man does in stand-up comedy. More im-
portant, however, is the creation of sympathy. Overt strength and power is
rarely seductive—it makes us afraid, or envious. The royal road to seduction
is to play up your vulnerability and helplessness. You cannot make this ob-
vious; to seem to be begging for sympathy is to seem needy, which is en-
tirely anti-seductive. Do not proclaim yourself a victim or underdog, but
reveal it in your manner, in your confusion. A display of "natural" weak-
ness will make you instantly lovable, both lowering people's defenses and
making them feel delightfully superior to you. Put yourself in situations
that make you seem weak, in which someone else has the advantage; they
are the bully, you are the innocent lamb. Without any effort on your part,
people will feel sympathy for you. Once people's eyes cloud over with
sentimental mist, they will not see how you are manipulating them.
2. Emma Crouch, born in 1842 in Plymouth, England, came from a re-
spectable middle-class family. Her father was a composer and music profes-
sor who dreamed of success in the world of light opera. Among his many
children, Emma was his favorite: she was a delightful child, lively and flirta-
tious, with red hair and a freckled face. Her father doted on her, and prom-
ised her a brilliant future in the theater. Unfortunately Mr. Crouch had a"Geographical" escapism
has been rendered
ineffective by the spread of
air routes. What remains is
"evolutionary" escapism—
a downward course in one's
development, back to the
ideas and emotions of
"golden childhood," which
may well be defined as
"regress towards
infantilism," escape to a
personal world of childish
ideas. • In a strictly-
regulated society, where life
follows strictly-defined
canons, the urge to escape
from the chain of things
"established once and for
all" must be felt
particularly strongly. . . . •
And the most perfect of
them [comedians] does this
with utmost perfection, for
he [Chaplin] serves this
principle . . . through the
subtlety of his method
which, offering the
spectactor an infantile
pattern to be imitated,
pscyhologically infects him
with infantilism and draws
him into the "golden age"
of the infantile paradise of
childhood.
—SERGEI EISENSTEIN, "CHARLIE
THE KID," FROM NOTES OF A
FILM DIRECTOR
