The Seducer's Victims—The Eighteen Types • 153
tions, mute your own colors and let them look funny and radiant by com-
parison. In general, play the Charmer. The reward of seducing Crushed
Stars is that you stir up powerful emotions. They will feel intensely grateful
to you for letting them shine. To whatever extent they had felt crushed and
bottled up, the easing of that pain releases intensity and passion, all directed
at you. They will fall madly in love. If you yourself have any star or dandy
tendencies it is wise to avoid such victims. Sooner or later those tendencies
will come out, and the competition between you will be ugly.
The Novice. What separates Novices from ordinary innocent young peo-
ple is that they are fatally curious. They have little or no experience of the
world, but have been exposed to it secondhand—in newspapers, films,
books. Finding their innocence a burden, they long to be initiated into the
ways of the world. Everyone sees them as so sweet and innocent, but they
know this isn't so—they cannot be as angelic as people think them.
Seducing a Novice is easy. To do it well, however, requires a bit of art.
Novices are interested in people with experience, particularly people with
a touch of corruption and evil. Make that touch too strong, though, and it
will intimidate and frighten them. What works best with a Novice is a mix
of qualities. You are somewhat childlike yourself, with a playful spirit. At
the same time, it is clear that you have hidden depths, even sinister ones.
(This was the secret of Lord Byron's success with so many innocent
women.) You are initiating your Novices not just sexually but experien-
tially, exposing them to new ideas, taking them to new places, new worlds
both literal and metaphoric. Do not make your seduction ugly or seedy—
everything must be romantic, even including the evil and dark side of life.
Young people have their ideals; it is best to initiate them with an aesthetic
touch. Seductive language works wonders on Novices, as does attention to
detail. Spectacles and colorful events appeal to their sensitive senses. They
are easily misled by these tactics, because they lack the experience to see
through them.
Sometimes Novices are a little older and have been at least somewhat
educated in the ways of the world. Yet they put on a show of innocence,
for they see the power it has over older people. These are coy Novices,
aware of the game they are playing—but Novices they remain. They may
be less easily misled than purer Novices, but the way to seduce them is
pretty much the same—mix innocence and corruption and you will fasci-
nate them.
The Conqueror. These types have an unusual amount of energy, which
they find difficult to control. They are always on the prowl for people to
conquer, obstacles to surmount. You will not always recognize Conquerors
by their exterior—they can seem a little shy in social situations and can
have a degree of reserve. Look not at their words or appearance but at their
154 • The Art of Seduction
actions, in work and in relationships. They love power, and by hook or by
crook they get it.
Conquerors tend to be emotional, but their emotion only comes out in
outbursts, when pushed. In matters of romance, the worst thing you can do
with them is lie down and make yourself easy prey; they may take advan-
tage of your weakness, but they will quickly discard you and leave you the
worse for wear. You want to give Conquerors a chance to be aggressive, to
overcome some resistance or obstacle, before letting them think they have
overwhelmed you. You want to give them a good chase. Being a little diffi-
cult or moody, using coquetry, will often do the trick. Do not be intimi-
dated by their aggressiveness and energy—that is precisely what you can
turn to your advantage. To break them in, keep them charging back and
forth like a bull. Eventually they will grow weak and dependent, as
Napoleon became the slave of Josephine.
The Conqueror is generally male but there are plenty of female Con-
querors out there—Lou Andreas-Salomé and Natalie Barney are famous
ones. Female Conquerors will succumb to coquetry, though, just as the
male ones will.
The Exotic Fetishist. Most of us are excited and intrigued by the exotic.
What separates Exotic Fetishists from the rest of us is the degree of this in-
terest, which seems to govern all their choices in life. In truth they feel
empty inside and have a strong dose of self-loathing. They do not like
wherever it is they come from, their social class (usually middle or upper),
and their culture because they do not like themselves.
These types are easy to recognize. They like to travel; their houses are
filled with objets from faraway places; they fetishize the music or art of this
or that foreign culture. They often have a strong rebellious streak. Clearly
the way to seduce them is to position yourself as exotic—if you do not at
least appear to come from a different background or race, or to have some
alien aura, you should not even bother. But it is always possible to play up
what makes you exotic, to make it a kind of theater for their amusement.
Your clothes, the things you talk about, the places you take them, make a
show of your difference. Exaggerate a little and they will imagine the rest,
because such types tend to be self-deluders. Exotic Fetishists, however, do
not make particularly good victims. Whatever exoticism you have will soon
seem banal to them, and they will want something else. It will be a struggle
to hold their interest. Their underlying insecurity will also keep you on
edge.
One variation on this type is the man or woman who is trapped in a
stultifying relationship, a banal occupation, a dead-end town. It is circum-
stance, as opposed to personal neurosis, that makes such people fetishize the
exotic; and these Exotic Fetishists are better victims than the self-loathing
kind, because you can offer them a temporary escape from whatever op-
