316 • The Art of Seduction
attempting to seduce the novel's beautiful heroine. Clarissa is young, virtu-
ous, and very much protected by her family. But Lovelace is a conniving se-
ducer. First he courts Clarissa's sister, Arabella. A match between them
seems likely. Then he suddenly switches attention to Clarissa, playing on
sibling rivalry to make Arabella furious. Their brother, James, is angered by
Lovelace's change in sentiments; he fights with Lovelace and is wounded.
The whole family is in an uproar, united against Lovelace, who, however,
manages to smuggle letters to Clarissa, and to visit her when she is at the
house of a friend. The family finds out, and accuses her of disloyalty.
Clarissa is innocent; she has not encouraged Lovelace's letters or visits. But
now her parents are determined to marry her off, to a rich older man.
Alone in the world, about to be married to a man she finds repulsive, she
turns to Lovelace as the only one who can save her from this mess. Eventu-
ally he rescues her by getting her to London, where she can escape this
dreaded marriage, but where she is also hopelessly isolated. In these cir-
cumstances her feelings toward him soften. All of this has been masterfully
orchestrated by Lovelace himself—the turmoil within the family, Clarissa's
eventual alienation from them, the whole scenario.
Your worst enemies in a seduction are often your targets' family and
friends. They are outside your circle and immune to your charms; they may
provide a voice of reason to the seduced. You must work silently and subtly
to alienate the target from them. Insinuate that they are jealous of your tar-
get's good fortune in finding you, or that they are parental figures who have
lost a taste for adventure. The latter argument is extremely effective with
young people, whose identities are in flux and who are more than ready to
rebel against any authority figure, particularly their parents. You represent
excitement and life; the friends and parents represent habit and boredom.
In Shakespeare's The Tragedy of King Richard III, Richard, when still the
Duke of Gloucester, has murdered King Henry VI and his son, Prince Ed-
ward. Shortly thereafter he accosts Lady Anne, Prince Edward's widow,
who knows what he has done to the two men closest to her, and who hates
him as much as a woman can hate. Yet Richard attempts to seduce her. His
method is simple: he tells her that what he did, he did because of his love
for her. He wanted there to be no one in her life but him. His feelings were
so strong he was driven to murder. Of course Lady Anne not only resists
this line of reasoning, she abhors him. But he persists. Anne is at a moment
of extreme vulnerability—alone in the world, with no one to support her,
at the height of grief. Incredibly, his words begin to have an effect.
Murder is not a seductive tactic, but the seducer does enact a kind of
killing—a psychological one. Our past attachments are a barrier to the pres-
ent. Even people we have left behind can continue to have a hold on us. As
a seducer you will be held up to the past, compared to previous suitors,
perhaps found inferior. Do not let it get to that point. Crowd out the past with
your attentions in the present. If necessary, find ways to disparage their pre-
vious lovers—subtly or not so subtly, depending on the situation. Even go
so far as to open old wounds, making them feel old pain and seeing by con-
Isolate the Victim • 317
trast how much better the present is. The more you can isolate them from
their past, the deeper they will sink with you into the present.
The principle of isolation can be taken literally by whisking the target
off to an exotic locale. This was Aly Khan's method; a secluded island
worked best, and indeed islands, cut off from the rest of the world, have al-
ways been associated with the pursuit of sensual pleasures. The Roman
Emperor Tiberius descended into debauchery once he made his home on
the island of Capri. The danger of travel is that your targets are intimately
exposed to you—it is hard to maintain an air of mystery. But if you take
them to a place alluring enough to distract them, you will prevent them
from focusing on anything banal in your character. Cleopatra lured Julius
Caesar into taking a voyage down the Nile. Moving deeper into Egypt, he
was further isolated from Rome, and Cleopatra was all the more seductive.
The early-twentieth-century lesbian seductress Natalie Barney had an on-
again-off-again affair with the poet Renée Vivien; to regain her affections,
she took Renée on a trip to the island of Lesbos, a place Natalie had visited
many times. In doing so she not only isolated Renée but disarmed and dis-
tracted her with the associations of the place, the home of the legendary
lesbian poet Sappho. Vivien even began to imagine that Natalie was Sap-
pho herself. Do not take the target just anywhere; pick the place that will
have the most effective associations.
The seductive power of isolation goes beyond the sexual realm. When
new adherents joined Mahatma Gandhi's circle of devoted followers, they
were encouraged to cut off their ties with the past—with their family and
friends. This kind of renunciation has been a requirement of many reli-
gious sects over the centuries. People who isolate themselves in this way are
much more vulnerable to influence and persuasion. A charismatic politi-
cian feeds off and even encourages people's feelings of alienation. John F.
Kennedy did this to great effect when he subtly disparaged the Eisenhower
years; the comfort of the 1950s, he implied, compromised American ideals.
He invited Americans to join him in a new life, on a "New Frontier," full
of danger and excitement. It was an extremely seductive lure, particularly
for the young, who were Kennedy's most enthusiastic supporters.
Finally, at some point in the seduction there must be a hint of danger in
the mix. Your targets should feel that they are gaining a great adventure in
following you, but are also losing something—a part of their past, their
cherished comfort. Actively encourage these ambivalent feelings. An ele-
ment of fear is the proper spice; although too much fear is debilitating, in
small doses it makes us feel alive. Like diving out of an airplane, it is excit-
ing, a thrill, at the same time that it is a little frightening. And the only per-
son there to break the fall, or catch them, is you.
