Raising the Temperature
In 1889, the top New York theatrical manager Ernest Jurgens visited
France on one of his many scouting trips. Jurgens was known for his
honesty, a rare commodity in the shady entertainment world, and for
his ability to find unusual acts. He had to spend the night in Marseilles, and
while wandering along the quay of the old harbor, he heard excited catcalls
issuing from a working-class cabaret, and decided to go in. A twenty-one-
year-old Spanish dancer named Caroline Otero was performing, and the
minute Jurgens laid eyes on her he was a changed man. Her appearance was
startling—five foot ten, fiery dark eyes, black waist-length hair, her body
corseted into a perfect hourglass figure. But it was the way she danced that
made his heart pound—her whole body alive, writhing like an animal in
heat, as she performed a fandango. Her dancing was hardly professional, but
she enjoyed herself so much and was so unrestrained that none of that mat-
tered. Jurgens also could not help but notice the men in the cabaret watch-
ing her, their mouths agape.
After the show, Jurgens went backstage to introduce himself. Otero's
eyes came alive as he spoke of his job and of New York. He felt a heat, a
twitching, in his body as she looked him up and down. Her voice was deep
and raspy, the tongue constantly in play as she rolled her Rs. Closing the
door, Otero ignored the knocks and pleas of the admirers dying to speak to
her. She said that her way of dancing was natural—her mother was a gypsy,
Soon she asked Jurgens to be her escort that evening, and as he helped her
with her coat, she leaned back toward him slightly, as if she had lost her
balance. As they walked around the city, her arm in his, she would occa-
sionally whisper in his ear. Jurgens felt his usual reserve melt away. He held
her tighter. He was a family man, had never considered cheating on his
wife, but without thinking, he brought Otero back to his hotel room. She
began to take off some of her clothes—coat, gloves, hat—a perfectly nor-
mal thing to do, but the way she did it made him lose all restraint. The nor-
mally timid Jurgens went on the attack.
The next morning Jurgens signed Otero to a lucrative contract—a great
risk, considering that she was an amateur at best. He brought her to Paris
and assigned a top theatrical coach to her. Hurrying back to New York, he
fed the newspapers with reports of this mysterious Spanish beauty poised to
conquer the city. Soon rival papers were claiming she was an Andalusian
countess, an escaped harem girl, the widow of a sheik, on and on. HeThe year was 1907 and
La Belle [Otero], by then,
had been an international
figure for over a dozen
years. The story was told
by M. Maurice Chevalier.
• "I was a young star
about to make my first
appearance at the Folies.
Otero had been the
headliner there for several
weeks and although I
knew who she was I had
never seen her before on
stage or off • "I was
scurrying along, head bent,
thinking of something or
other, when I looked up.
There was La Belle, in the
company of another
woman, walking in my
direction. Otero was then
nearly forty and I was not
yet out of my teens but—
ah!—she was so beautiful!
• "She was tall, dark-
haired, with a magnificent
body, like the bodies of the
women of those days, not
like the lightweight ones of
today." • Chevalier smiled.
• "Of course I like modern
women, too, but there was
something of a fatal charm
about Otero. We three
stood there for a moment or
two, not saying a word, I
staring at La Belle, not so
young as she once was and
maybe not so beautiful, but
395
396 • The Art of Seduction
made frequent trips to Paris to be with her, forgetting about his family, lav-
ishing money and gifts on her.
Otero's New York debut, in October of 1890, was an astounding suc-
cess. "Otero dances with abandon," read an article in The New York Times.
"Her lithe and supple body looks like that of a serpent writhing in quick,
graceful curves." In a few short weeks she became the toast of New York
society, performing at private parties late into the night. The tycoon Wil-
liam Vanderbilt courted her with expensive jewels and evenings on his
yacht. Other millionaires vied for her attention. Meanwhile Jurgens was
dipping into the company till to pay for presents for her—he would do
anything to keep her, a task in which he was facing heavy competition. A
few months later, after his embezzling became public, he was a ruined man.
He eventually committed suicide.
Otero went back to France, to Paris, and over the next few years rose to
become the most infamous courtesan of the Belle Epoque. Word spread
quickly: a night with La Belle Otero (as she was now known) was more ef-
fective than all the aphrodisiacs in the world. She had a temper, and was de-
manding, but that was to be expected. Prince Albert of Monaco, a man
who had been plagued by doubts of his virility, felt like an insatiable tiger
after a night with Otero. She became his mistress. Other royalty followed—
Prince Albert of Wales (later King Edward VII), the Shah of Persia, Grand
Duke Nicholas of Russia. Less wealthy men emptied their bank accounts,
and Jurgens was only the first of many whom Otero drove to suicide.
During World War I, a twenty-nine-year-old American soldier named
Frederick, stationed in France, won $37,000 in a four-day crap game. On
his next leave he went to Nice and checked himself into the finest hotel.
On his first night in the hotel restaurant, he recognized Otero sitting alone
at a table. He had seen her perform in Paris ten years before, and had be-
come obsessed with her. She was now close to fifty, but was more alluring
than ever. He greased some palms and was able to sit at her table. He could
hardly talk: the way her eyes bored into him, a simple readjustment in her
chair, her body brushing up against him as she got up, the way she managed
to walk in front of him and display herself. Later, strolling along a boule-
vard, they passed a jewelry store. He went inside, and moments later found
himself plopping down $31,000 for a diamond necklace. For three nights
La Belle Otero was his. Never in his life had he felt so masculine and im-
petuous. Years later, he still believed it was well worth the price he had
paid.
Interpretation. Although La Belle Otero was beautiful, hundreds of
women were more so, or were more charming and talented. But Otero was
constantly on fire. Men could read it in her eyes, the way her body moved,
a dozen other signs. The heat that radiated out from her came from her
own inner desires: she was insatiably sexual. But she was also a practiced
and calculating courtesan, and knew how to put her sexuality to effect.still quite a woman. •
"She looked right at me,
then turned to the lady she
was with—some friend, I
guess—and spoke to her in
English, which she thought
I didn't understand.
However, I did. •
" 'Who's the very
handsome young man?'
Otero asked. • "The other
one answered, 'He's
Chevalier.' • " 'He has
such beautiful eyes' ha
Belle said, looking straight
at me, right up and down.
• "Then she almost floored
me with her frankness. •
" 'I wonder if he'd like to
go to bed with me. I think
I'll ask him!' Only she
didn't say it so delicately.
She was much cruder and
more to the point. • "It
was at this moment I had
to make up my mind
rather quickly. La Belle
moved toward me. Instead
of introducing myself and
succumbing to the
consequences, I pretended I
didn't understand what
she'd said, uttered some
pleasantry in French and
moved away to my dressing
room. • "I could see La
Belle smile in an odd
fashion as I passed her;
like a sleek tigress watching
its dinner go away. For a
fleeting second I thought
she might turn around and
follow me. " • What would
Chevalier have done had
she pursued him? His
lower lip dropped into that
half pout which is the
Frenchman's exclusive
possession. Then he
grinned. • "I'd have
slowed down and let her
catch up."
—ARTHUR H. LEWIS,
LA BELLE OTERO
