presses them. Nothing, however, will offer true Exotic Fetishists escape
from themselves.
The Drama Queen. There are people who cannot do without some con-
stant drama in their lives—it is their way of deflecting boredom. The great-
est mistake you can make in seducing these Drama Queens is to come
offering stability and security. That will only make them run for the hills.
Most often, Drama Queens (and there are plenty of men in this category)
enjoy playing the victim. They want something to complain about, they
want pain. Pain is a source of pleasure for them. With this type, you have to
be willing and able to give them the mental rough treatment they desire.
That is the only way to seduce them in a deep manner. The moment you
turn too nice, they will find some reason to quarrel or get rid of you.
You will recognize Drama Queens by the number of people who have
hurt them, the tragedies and traumas that have befallen them. At the ex-
treme, they can be hopelessly selfish and anti-seductive, but most of them
are relatively harmless and will make fine victims if you can live with the
sturm und drang. If for some reason you want something long term with
this type, you will constantly have to inject drama into your relationship.
For some this can be an exciting challenge and a source for constantly re-
newing the relationship. Generally, however, you should see an involve-
ment with a Drama Queen as something fleeting and a way to bring a little
drama into your own life.
The Professor. These types cannot get out of the trap of analyzing and
criticizing everything that crosses their path. Their minds are overdevel-
oped and overstimulated. Even when they talk about love or sex, it is with
great thought and analysis. Having developed their minds at the expense of
their bodies, many of them feel physically inferior and compensate by lord-
ing their mental superiority over others. Their conversation is often wry or
ironic—you never quite know what they are saying, but you sense them
looking down on you. They would like to escape their mental prisons, they
would like pure physicality, without any analysis, but they cannot get there
on their own. Professor types sometimes engage in relationships with other
professor types, or with people they can treat as inferiors. But deep down
they long to be overwhelmed by someone with physical presence—a Rake
or a Siren, for instance.
Professors can make excellent victims, for underneath their intellectual
strength lie gnawing insecurities. Make them feel like Don Juans or Sirens,
to even the slightest degree, and they are your slaves. Many of them have a
masochistic streak that will come out once you stir their dormant senses.
You are offering an escape from the mind, so make it as complete as possi-
ble: if you have intellectual tendencies yourself, hide them. They will onlyThe Seducer's Victims—The Eighteen Types • 155
156 • The Art of Seduction
stir your target's competitive juices and get their minds turning. Let your
Professors keep their sense of mental superiority; let them judge you. You
will know what they will try to hide: that you are the one in control, for
you are giving them what no one else can give them—physical stimulation.
The Beauty. From early on in life, the Beauty is gazed at by others. Their
desire to look at her is the source of her power, but also the source of much
unhappiness: she constantly worries that her powers are waning, that she
is no longer attracting attention. If she is honest with herself, she also
senses that being worshiped only for one's appearance is monotonous and
unsatisfying—and lonely. Many men are intimidated by beauty and prefer
to worship it from afar; others are drawn in, but not for the purpose of
conversation. The Beauty suffers from isolation.
Because she has so many lacks, the Beauty is relatively easy to seduce,
and if done right, you will have won not only a much prized catch but
someone who will grow dependent on what you provide. Most important
in this seduction is to validate those parts of the Beauty that no one else
appreciates—her intelligence (generally higher than people imagine), her
skills, her character. Of course you must worship her body—you cannot
stir up any insecurities in the one area in which she knows her strength, and
the strength on which she most depends—but you also must worship her
mind and soul. Intellectual stimulation will work well on the Beauty, dis-
tracting her from her doubts and insecurities, and making it seem that you
value that side of her personality.
Because the Beauty is always being looked at, she tends to be passive.
Beneath her passivity, though, there often lies frustration: the Beauty would
love to be more active and to actually do some chasing of her own. A little
coquettishness can work well here: at some point in all your worshiping,
you might go a little cold, inviting her to come after you. Train her to be
more active and you will have an excellent victim. The only downside is
that her many insecurities require constant attention and care.
The Aging Baby. Some people refuse to grow up. Perhaps they are afraid
of death or of growing old; perhaps they are passionately attached to the
life they led as children. Disliking responsibility, they struggle to turn
everything into play and recreation. In their twenties they can be charming,
in their thirties interesting, but by the time they reach their forties they are
beginning to wear thin.
Contrary to what you might imagine, one Aging Baby does not want
to be involved with another Aging Baby, even though the combination
might seem to increase the chances for play and frivolity. The Aging Baby
does not want competition, but an adult figure. If you desire to seduce this
type, you must be prepared to be the responsible, staid one. That may be a
