124 • The Art of Seduction
the answers to the questions and debated with aplomb, quoting statistics on
the accomplishments of the Eisenhower administration, in which he had
served as vice-president. But beneath the glare of the cameras, on black and
white television, he was a ghastly figure—his five o'clock shadow covered
up with powder, streaks of sweat on his brow and cheeks, his face drooping
with fatigue, his eyes shifting and blinking, his body rigid. What was he so
worried about? The contrast with Kennedy was startling. If Nixon looked
only at his opponent, Kennedy looked out at the audience, making eye
contact with his viewers, addressing them in their living rooms as no politi-
cian had ever done before. If Nixon talked data and niggling points of de-
bate, Kennedy spoke of freedom, of building a new society, of recapturing
America's pioneer spirit. His manner was sincere and emphatic. His words
were not specific, but he made his listeners imagine a wonderful future.
The day after the debate, Kennedy's poll numbers soared miraculously,
and wherever he went he was greeted by crowds of young girls, screaming
and jumping. His beautiful wife Jackie by his side, he was a kind of demo-
cratic prince. Now his television appearances were events. He was in due
course elected president, and his inaugural address, also broadcast on televi-
sion, was stirring. It was a cold and wintry day. In the background, Eisen-
hower sat huddled in coat and scarf, looking old and beaten. But Kennedy
stood hatless and coatless to address the nation: "I do not believe that any of
us would exchange places with any other people or any other generation.
The energy, the faith, the devotion which we bring to this endeavor will
light our country and all who serve it—and the glow from that fire can
truly light the world."
Over the months to come Kennedy gave innumerable live press confer-
ences before the TV cameras, something no previous president had dared.
Facing the firing squad of lenses and questions, he was unafraid, speaking
coolly and slightly ironically. What was going on behind those eyes, that
smile? People wanted to know more about him. The magazines teased its
readers with information—photographs of Kennedy with his wife and
children, or playing football on the White House lawn, interviews creating
a sense of him as a devoted family man, yet one who mingled as an equal
with glamorous stars. The images all melted together—the space race, the
Peace Corps, Kennedy facing up to the Soviets during the Cuban missile
crisis just as he had faced up to Truman.
After Kennedy was assassinated, Jackie said in an interview that before
he went to bed, he would often play the soundtracks to Broadway musicals,
and his favorite of these was Camelot, with its lines, "Don't let it be forgot /
that once there was a spot / For one brief shining moment / That was
known as Camelot." There would be great presidents again, Jackie said, but
never "another Camelot." The name "Camelot" seemed to stick, making
Kennedy's thousand days in office resonate as myth.
Kennedy's seduction of the American public was conscious and calculated.
It was also more Hollywood than Washington, which was not surprising:news. By this strategy he
made the news like dreams
and like the movies—a
realm in which images
played out scenarios that
accorded with the viewer's
deepest yearnings. . . .
Never appearing in an
actual film, but rather
turning the television
apparatus into his screen,
he became the greatest
movie star of the twentieth
century.
—JOHN HELLMANN, THE
KENNEDY OBSESSION: THE
AMERICAN MYTH OF JFK
But we have seen that,
considered as a total
phenomenon, the history of
the stars repeats, in its own
proportions, the history of
the gods. Before the gods
(before the stars) the
mythical universe (the
screen) was peopled with
specters or phantoms
endowed with the glamour
and magic of the double. •
Several of these presences
have progressively assumed
body and substance, have
taken form, amplified, and
flowered into gods and
goddesses. And even as
certain major gods of the
ancient pantheons meta-
morphose themselves into
hero -gods of salvation, th e
star-goddesses humanize
themselves and become new
mediators between the
fantastic world of dreams
and man's daily life on
earth. ...• The heroes of
the movies . . . are, in an
obviously attenuated way,
mythological heroes in this
sense of becoming divine.
The star is the actor or
actress who absorbs some of
the heroic—i.e., divinized
and mythic—substance of
the hero or heroine of the
movies, and who in turn
enriches this substance by
The Star • 125
Kennedy's father, Joseph, had once been a movie producer, and Kennedy
himself had spent time in Hollywood, hobnobbing with actors and trying
to figure out what made them stars. He was particularly fascinated with
Gary Cooper, Montgomery Clift, and Cary Grant; he often called Grant
for advice.
Hollywood had found ways to unite the entire country around cer-
tain themes, or myths—often the great American myth of the West. The
great stars embodied mythic types: John Wayne the patriarch, Clift
the Promethean rebel, Jimmy Stewart the noble hero, Marilyn Monroe the
siren. These were not mere mortals but gods and goddesses to be dreamed
and fantasized about. All of Kennedy's actions were framed in the conven-
tions of Hollywood. He did not argue with his opponents, he confronted
them dramatically. He posed, and in visually fascinating ways—whether
with his wife, with his children, or alone onstage. He copied the facial
expressions, the presence, of a Dean or a Cooper. He did not discuss
policy details but waxed eloquent about grand mythic themes, the kind
that could unite a divided nation. And all this was calculated for television,
for Kennedy mostly existed as a televised image. That image haunted
our dreams. Well before his assassination, Kennedy attracted fantasies of
America's lost innocence with his call for a renaissance of the pioneer spirit,
a New Frontier.
Of all the character types, the Mythic Star is perhaps the most powerful
of all. People are divided by all kinds of consciously recognized categories—
race, gender, class, religion, politics. It is impossible, then, to gain power on
a grand scale, or to win an election, by drawing on conscious awareness; an
appeal to any one group will only alienate another. Unconsciously, how-
ever, there is much we share. All of us are mortal, all of us know fear, all of
us have been stamped with the imprint of parent figures; and nothing con-
jures up this shared experience more than myth. The patterns of myth,
born out of warring feelings of helplessness on the one hand and thirst for
immortality on the other, are deeply engraved in us all.
Mythic Stars are figures of myth come to life. To appropriate their
power, you must first study their physical presence—how they adopt a dis-
tinctive style, are cool and visually arresting. Then you must assume the
pose of a mythic figure: the rebel, the wise patriarch, the adventurer. (The
pose of a Star who has struck one of these mythic poses might do the trick.)
Make these connections vague; they should never be obvious to the con-
scious mind. Your words and actions should invite interpretation beyond
their surface appearance; you should seem to be dealing not with specific,
nitty-gritty issues and details but with matters of life and death, love and
hate, authority and chaos. Your opponent, similarly, should be framed
not merely as an enemy for reasons of ideology or competition but as a vil-
lain, a demon. People are hopelessly susceptible to myth, so make yourself
the hero of a great drama. And keep your distance—let people identify
with you without being able to touch you. They can only watch and
dream.his or her own contrib-
ution. When we speak of
the myth of the star, we
mean first of all the process
of divinization which the
movie actor undergoes, a
process that makes him the
idol of crowds.
—EDGAR MORIN, THE STARS,
TRANSLATED BY RICHARD
HOWARD
Age: 22, Sex: female,
Nationality: British,
Profession: medical student
"[Deanna Durbin] became
my first and only screen
idol. I wanted to be as
much like her as possible,
both in my manners and
clothes. Whenever I was to
get a new dress, I would
find from my collection a
particularly nice picture of
Deanna and ask for a dress
like she was wearing. I did
my hair as much like hers
as 1 could manage. If I
found myself in any
annoying or aggravating
situation . . . I found
myself wondering what
Deanna would do and
modified my own reactions
accordingly. ..." • Age:
26, Sex: female, Nation-
ality: British "I only fell in
love once with a movie
actor. It was Conrad Veidt.
His magnetism and his
personality got me. His
voice and gestures fascin-
ated me. I hated him,
feared him, loved him.
When he died it seemed to
me that a vital part of my
imagination died too, and
my world of dreams was
bare. "
—J. P. MAYER, BRITISH
CINEMAS AND THEIR
AUDIENCES
