344 • The Art of Seduction
Wellington, and the writer Benjamin Constant. It had also been rumored
that despite all her flirtations she was still a virgin. She was now almost
forty, but she was the type of woman who seems youthful at any age.
Drawn together by their grief over de Staël's death, she and Chateaubriand
became friends. She listened so attentively to him, adopting his moods and
echoing his sentiments, that he felt that he had at last met a woman who
understood him. There was also something rather ethereal about Madame
Récamier. Her walk, her voice, her eyes—more than one man had com-
pared her to some unearthly angel. Chateaubriand soon burned with the
desire to possess her physically.
The year after their friendship began, she had a surprise for him: she
had convinced a friend to purchase Vallée aux Loups. The friend was away
for a few weeks, and she invited Chateaubriand to spend some time with
her at his former estate. He happily accepted. He showed her around, ex-
plaining what each little patch of ground had meant to him, the memories
the place conjured up. He felt youthful feelings welling up inside him, feel-
ings he had forgotten about. He delved further into the past, describing
events in his childhood. At moments, walking with Madame Récamier and
looking into those kind eyes, he felt a shiver of recognition, but he could
not quite identify it. All he knew was that he had to go back to the mem-
oirs that he had laid aside. "I intend to employ the little time that is left to
me in describing my youth," he said, "so long as its essence remains palpa-
ble to me."
It seemed that Madame Récamier returned Chateaubriand's love, but as
usual she struggled to keep it a spiritual affair. The Enchanter, however,
deserved his nickname. His poetry, his air of melancholy, and his persis-
tence finally won the day and she succumbed, perhaps for the first time in
her life. Now, as lovers, they were inseparable. But as always with Cha-
teaubriand, over time one woman was not enough. The restless spirit
returned. He began to have affairs again. Soon he and Récamier stopped
seeing each other.
In 1832, Chateaubriand was traveling through Switzerland. Once again
his life had taken a downward turn; only this time he truly was old, in body
and spirit. In the Alps, strange thoughts of his youth began to assail him,
memories of the castle in Brittany. Word reached him that Madame Ré-
camier was in the area. He had not seen her in years, and he hurried to the
inn where she was staying. She was as kind to him as ever; during the day
they took walks together, and at night they stayed up late, talking.
One day, Chateaubriand told Récamier he had finally decided to finish
his memoirs. And he had a confession to make: he told her the story of
Sylphide, his imaginary lover when he was growing up. He had once
hoped to meet a Sylphide in real life, but the women he had known had
paled in comparison. Over the years he had forgotten about his imaginary
lover, but now he was an old man, and he not only thought of her again,
he could see her face and hear her voice. And with those memories he real-
ized that he had in fact met Sylphide in real life—it was Madame Ré-
Effect a Regression • 345
camier. The face and voice were close. More important, there was the calm
spirit, the innocent, virginal quality. Reading to her the prayer to Sylphide
he had just written, he told her he wanted to be young again, and seeing
her had brought his youth back to him. Reconciled with Madame Ré-
camier, he began to work again on the memoirs, which were eventually
published under the title Memoirs from Beyond the Grave. Most critics agreed
that the book was his masterpiece. The memoirs were dedicated to
Madame Récamier, to whom he remained devoted until his death, in
1848.
Interpretation. All of us carry within us an image of an ideal type of per-
son whom we yearn to meet and love. Most often the type is a composite
made up of bits and pieces of different people from our youth, and even of
characters in books and movies. People who influenced us inordinately—a
teacher for instance—may also figure. The traits have nothing to do with
superficial interests. Rather, they are unconscious, hard to verbalize.
We searched hardest for this ideal type in our adolescence, when we
were more idealistic. Often our first loves have more of these traits than our
subsequent affairs. For Chateaubriand, living with his family in their se-
cluded castle, his first love was his sister Lucile, whom he adored and ideal-
ized. But since love with her was impossible, he created a figure out of his
imagination who had all her positive attributes—nobility of spirit, inno-
cence, courage.
Madame Récamier could not have known about Chateaubriand's ideal
type, but she did know something about him, well before she ever met
him. She had read all of his books, and his characters were highly autobio-
graphical. She knew of his obsession with his lost youth; and everyone
knew of his endless and unsatisfying affairs with women, his hyperrestless
spirit. Madame Récamier knew how to mirror people, entering their spirit,
and one of her first acts was to take Chateaubriand to Vallée aux Loups,
where he felt he had left part of his youth. Alive with memories, he re-
gressed further into his childhood, to the days in the castle. She actively en-
couraged this. Most important, she embodied a spirit that came naturally to
her, but that matched his youthful ideal: innocent, noble, kind. (The fact
that so many men fell in love with her suggests that many men had the
same ideals.) Madame Récamier was Lucile/Sylphide. It took him years to
realize it, but when he did, her spell over him was complete.
It is nearly impossible to embody someone's ideal completely. But if
you come close enough, if you evoke some of that ideal spirit, you can lead
that person into a deep seduction. To effect this regression you must play
the role of the therapist. Get your targets to open up about their past, par-
ticularly their former loves and most particularly their first love. Pay atten-
tion to any expressions of disappointment, how this or that person did not
give them what they wanted. Take them to places that evoke their youth.
In this regression you are creating not so much a relationship of depen-
