
The Mesmerizing Effect
In December 1898, the wives of the seven major Western ambassadors to
China received a strange invitation: the sixty-three-year-old Empress
Dowager Tzu Hsi was hosting a banquet in their honor in the Forbidden
City in Beijing. The ambassadors themselves had been quite displeased
with the empress dowager, for several reasons. She was a Manchu, a race of
northerners who had conquered China in the early seventeenth century,
establishing the Ching Dynasty and ruling the country for nearly three
hundred years. By the 1890s, the Western powers had begun to carve up
parts of China, a country they considered backward. They wanted China
to modernize, but the Manchus were conservative, and resisted all reform.
Earlier in 1898, the Chinese Emperor Kuang Hsu, the empress dowager's
twenty-seven-year-old nephew, had actually begun a series of reforms,
with the blessings of the West. Then, one hundred days into this period of
reform, word reached the Western diplomats from the Forbidden City that
the emperor was quite ill, and that the empress dowager had taken power.
They suspected foul play; the empress had probably acted to stop the re-
forms. The emperor was being mistreated, probably poisoned—
perhaps he was already dead. When the seven ambassadors' wives were
preparing for their unusual visit, their husbands warned them: Do not trust
the empress dowager. A wily woman with a cruel streak, she had risen from
obscurity to become the concubine of a previous emperor and had man-
aged over the years to accumulate great power. Far more than the emperor,
she was the most feared person in China.
On the appointed day, the women were borne into the Forbidden City
in a procession of sedan chairs carried by court eunuchs in dazzling uni-
forms. The women themselves, not to be outdone, wore the latest Western
fashions—tight corsets, long velvet dresses with leg-of-mutton sleeves, bil-
lowing petticoats, tall plumed hats. The residents of the Forbidden City
looked at their clothes in amazement, and particularly at the way their
dresses displayed their prominent bosoms. The wives felt sure they had im-
pressed their hosts. At the Audience Hall they were greeted by princes and
princesses, as well as lower royalty. The Chinese women were wearing
magnificent Manchu costumes with the traditional high, jewel-encrusted
black headdresses; they were arranged in a hierarchical order reflected in
the color of their dresses, an astounding rainbow of color.
The wives were served tea in the most delicate porcelain cups, thenThe barge she sat in, like a
burnish'd throne, \Burn'd
on the water: the poop was
beaten gold; \ Purple the
sails, and so perfumed that
\ The winds were love-sick
with them; the oars were
silver, \ Which to the tune
of flutes kept stroke, and
made \ The water which
they beat to follow faster, \
As amorous of their
strokes. For her own
person, \ It beggar'd all
description: she did lie \ In
her pavilion—cloth-of-gold
of tissue— \ O'er picturing
that Venus where we see \
The fancy outwork nature:
on each side her \ Stood
pretty dimpled boys, like
smiling Cupids, \ With
divers-colour'd fans, whose
wind did seem \ To glow
the delicate cheeks which
they did cool, \ And
what they undid did. . . . \
Her gentlewomen, like the
Nereids, \ So many
mermaids, tended her i' the
eyes, \ And made their
bends adornings: at the
helm \ A seeming mermaid
steers: the silken tackle \
Swell with the touches of
those flower-soft hands \
That yarely frame the
office. From the barge \ A
strange invisible perfume
hits the sense \ Of the
267
