20 • The Art of Seduction
impossible to bring such a thing to pass, she did not mind playing along and
agreeing to his bold proposal.
Mademoiselle de Valois had a chambermaid named Angelique, who
dressed her for bed and slept in an adjoining room. One night as the chap-
erone was knitting, de Valois looked up from the book she was reading to
see Angelique carrying her mistress's nightclothes to her room, but for some
strange reason Angelique looked back at her and smiled—it was Richelieu,
expertly dressed as the maid! De Valois nearly gasped from fright, but caught
herself, realizing the danger she was in: if she said anything her family
would find out about the notes, and about her part in the whole affair.
What could she do? She decided to go to her room and talk the young
duke out of his ridiculously dangerous maneuver. She said good night to her
chaperone, but once she was in her bedroom, the words she had planned
were useless. When she tried to reason with Richelieu, he responded with
that look in his eye, and then with his arms around her. She could not yell,
but now she was unsure what to do. His impetuous words, his caresses, the
danger of it all—her head was whirling, she was lost. What was virtue and
her prior boredom compared to an evening with the court's most notorious
rake? So while the chaperone knitted away, the duke initiated her into the
rituals of libertinage.
Months later, de Valois's father had reason to suspect that Richelieu had
broken through his lines of defense. The chaperone was fired, the precau-
tions were doubled. D'Orléans did not realize that to Richelieu such mea-
sures were a challenge, and he lived for challenges. He bought the house
next door under an assumed name and secretly tunneled a trapdoor through
the wall adjoining the duke's kitchen cupboard. In this cupboard, over the
next few months—until the novelty wore off—de Valois and Richelieu en-
joyed endless trysts.
Everyone in Paris knew of Richelieu's exploits, for he made it a point
to publicize them as loudly as possible. Every week a new story would cir-
culate through the court. A husband had locked his wife in an upstairs
room at night, worried the duke was after her; to reach her the duke had
crawled in darkness along a thin wooden plank suspended between two
upper-floor windows. Two women who lived in the same house, one a
widow, the other married and quite religious, had discovered to their mu-
tual horror that the duke was having an affair with both of them at the
same time, leaving one in the middle of the night to be with the other.
When they confronted him, the duke, always on the prowl for something
novel, and a devilish talker, had neither apologized nor backed down, but
proceeded to talk them into a menage a trois, playing on the wounded
vanity of each woman, who could not stand the thought of him preferring
the other. Year after year, the stories of his remarkable seductions spread.
One woman admired his audacity and bravery, another his gallantry in
thwarting a husband. Women competed for his attention: if he did not
want to seduce you, there had to be something wrong with you. To be the
target of his attentions became a great fantasy. At one point two ladiesto drench me before I felt
your scalding touch. But
your fire is such that even
in water I burn. • TISBEA:
So cold and yet burning? •
DON JUAN: So much fire
is in you. • TISBEA: How
well you talk! • DON
JUAN: How well you
understand! • TISBEA: I
hope to God you're not
lying.
—TIRSO DE MOLINA, THE
PLAYBOY OF SEVILLE,
TRANSLATED BY ADRIENNE M.
SCHIZZANO AND OSCAR
MANDEL
Pleased with my first
success, I determined to
profit by this happy
reconciliation. I called them
my dear wives, my faithful
companions, the two beings
chosen to make me happy.
I sought to turn their
heads, and to rouse in
them desires the strength of
which I knew and which
would drive away any
reflections contrary to my
plans. The skillful man
who knows how to
communicate gradually the
heat of love to the senses of
the most virtuous woman
is quite certain of soon
being absolute master of
her mind and her person;
you cannot reflect when
you have lost your head;
and, moreover, principles of
wisdom, however deeply
engraved they may be on
the mind, are effaced in
that moment when the
heart yearns only for
pleasure: pleasure alone
then commands and is
obeyed. The man who has
had experience of conquests
nearly always succeeds
where he who is only timid
and in love fails. . . . •
When I had brought my
two belles to the state of
abandonment in which I
The Rake • 21
fought a pistol duel over the duke, and one of them was seriously
wounded. The Duchess d'Orléans, Richelieu's most bitter enemy, once
wrote, "If I believed in sorcery I should think that the Duke possessed
some supernatural secret, for I have never known a woman to oppose the
very least resistance to him."
In seduction there is often a dilemma: to seduce you need planning and cal-
culation, but if your victim suspects that you have ulterior motives, she will
grow defensive. Furthermore, if you seem to be in control, you will inspire
fear instead of desire. The Ardent Rake solves this dilemma in the most art-
ful manner. Of course he must calculate and plan—he has to find a way
around the jealous husband, or whatever the obstacle is. It is exhausting
work. But by nature, the Ardent Rake also has the advantage of an uncon-
trollable libido. When he pursues a woman, he really is aglow with desire;
the victim senses this and is inflamed, even despite herself. How can she
imagine that he is a heartless seducer who will abandon her when he so ar-
dently braves all dangers and obstacles to get to her? And even if she is
aware of his rakish past, of his incorrigible amorality, it doesn't matter, be-
cause she also sees his weakness. He cannot control himself; he actually is a
slave to all women. As such he inspires no fear.
The Ardent Rake teaches us a simple lesson: intense desire has a dis-
tracting power on a woman, just as the Siren's physical presence does on a
man. A woman is often defensive and can sense insincerity or calculation.
But if she feels consumed by your attentions, and is confident you will do
anything for her, she will notice nothing else about you, or will find a way
to forgive your indiscretions. This is the perfect cover for a seducer. The
key is to show no hesitation, to abandon all restraint, to let yourself go, to
show that you cannot control yourself and are fundamentally weak. Do not
worry about inspiring mistrust; as long as you are the slave to her charms,
she will not think of the aftermath.
The Demonic Rake
In the early 1880s, members of Roman high society began to talk of a
young journalist who had arrived on the scene, a certain Gabriele D'An-
nunzio. This was strange in itself, for Italian royalty had only the deepest
contempt for anyone outside their circle, and a newspaper society reporter
was almost as low as you could go. Indeed well-born men paid D'Annun-
zio little attention. He had no money and few connections, coming from a
strictly middle-class background. Besides, to them he was downright
ugly—short and stocky, with a dark, splotchy complexion and bulging eyes.
The men thought him so unappealing they gladly let him mingle with their
wives and daughters, certain that their women would be safe with this gar-
goyle and happy to get this gossip hunter off their hands. No, it was not the
men who talked of D'Annunzio; it was their wives.wanted them, I expressed a
more eager desire; their
eyes lit up; my caresses
were returned; and it was
plain that their resistance
would not delay for more
than a few moments the
next scene I desired them
to play. I proposed that
each should accompany me
in turn into a charming
closet, next to the room in
which we were, which I
wanted them to admire.
They both remained silent.
• "You hesitate?" I said to
them. "I will see which of
you is the more attached
to me. The one who loves
me the more will be the
first to follow the lover she
wishes to convince of her
affection. . . ." • I knew
my puritan, and I was well
aware that, after a few
Struggles, she gave herself
up completely to the
present moment. 'This one
appeared to be as agreeable
to her as the others we had
previously spent together;
she forgot that she was
sharing me [with Madame
Renaud]. ...• [When
her turn came] Madame
Renaud responded with a
transport that proved her
contentment, and she left
the sitting only after having
repeated continually:
"What a man! What a
man! He is astonishing!
How often you could be
happy with him if he were
only faithful!"
—THE PRIVATE LIFE OF THE
MARSHAL DUKE OF RICHELIEU,
TRANSLATED BY F. S. FLINT
