Psychological Traits of the Natural
Children are not as guileless as we like to imagine. They suffer from
feelings of helplessness, and sense early on the power of their natural
charm to remedy their weakness in the adult world. They learn to play a
game: if their natural innocence can persuade a parent to yield to their de-
sires in one instance, then it is something they can use strategically in an-
other instance, laying it on thick at the right moment to get their way. If
their vulnerability and weakness is so attractive, then it is something they
can use for effect.
Why are we seduced by children's naturalness? First, because anything
natural has an uncanny effect on us. Since the beginning of time, natural
phenomena—such as lightning storms or eclipses—have instilled in human
beings an awe tinged with fear. The more civilized we become, the greater
the effect such natural events have on us; the modern world surrounds us
with so much that is manufactured and artificial that something sudden and
inexplicable fascinates us. Children also have this natural power, but be-
cause they are unthreatening and human, they are not so much awe inspir-
ing as charming. Most people try to please, but the pleasantness of the child
comes effortlessly, defying logical explanation—and what is irrational is
often dangerously seductive.
More important, a child represents a world from which we have been
forever exiled. Because adult life is full of boredom and compromise, we
harbor an illusion of childhood as a kind of golden age, even though it can
often be a period of great confusion and pain. It cannot be denied, how-
ever, that childhood had certain privileges, and as children we had a plea-
surable attitude to life. Confronted with a particularly charming child, we
often feel wistful: we remember our own golden past, the qualities we have
lost and wish we had again. And in the presence of the child, we get a little
of that goldenness back.
Natural seducers are people who somehow avoided getting certain
childish traits drummed out of them by adult experience. Such people can
be as powerfully seductive as any child, because it seems uncanny and mar-
velous that they have preserved such qualities. They are not literally like
children, of course; that would make them obnoxious or pitiful. Rather it
is the spirit that they have retained. Do not imagine that this childishness is
something beyond their control. Natural seducers learn early on the value
of retaining a particular quality, and the seductive power it contains; theyLong-past ages have a
great and often puzzling
attraction for men's
imagination. Whenever
they are dissatisfied with
their present surround-
ings—and this happens
often enough—they turn
back to the past and hope
that they will now be able
to prove the truth of the
inextinguishable dream of
a golden age. They are
probably still under the
spell of their childhood,
which is presented to them
by their not impartial
memory as a time of
uninterrupted bliss.
—SIGMUND FREUD, THE
STASDARD EDITION OF THE
COMPLETE PSYCHOLOGICAL
WORKS OF SIGMUND FREUD,
VOLUME 23
When Hermes was born
on Mount Cyllene his
mother Maia laid him in
swaddling bands on a
winnowing fan, but he
grew with astonishing
quickness into a little boy,
and as soon as her back
was turned, slipped off and
went looking for adventure.
Arrived at Pieria, where
Apollo was tending a fine
herd of cows, he decided to
55
56 • The Art of Seduction
adapt and build upon those childlike traits that they managed to preserve,
exactly as the child learns to play with its natural charm. This is the key. It
is within your power to do the same, since there is lurking within all of us a
devilish child straining to be let loose. To do this successfully, you have to
be able to let go to a degree, since there is nothing less natural than seeming
hesitant. Remember the spirit you once had; let it return, without self-
consciousness. People are much more forgiving of those who go all the
way, who seem uncontrollably foolish, than the halfhearted adult with a
childish streak. Remember who you were before you became so polite and
self-effacing. To assume the role of the Natural, mentally position yourself
in any relationship as the child, the younger one.
The following are the main types of the adult Natural. Keep in mind
that the greatest natural seducers are often a blend of more than one of
these qualities.
The innocent. The primary qualities of innocence are weakness and mis-
understanding of the world. Innocence is weak because it is doomed to
vanish in a harsh, cruel world; the child cannot protect or hold on to its in-
nocence. The misunderstandings come from the child's not knowing about
good and evil, and seeing everything through uncorrupted eyes. The weak-
ness of children elicits sympathy, their misunderstandings make us laugh,
and nothing is more seductive than a mixture of laughter and sympathy.
The adult Natural is not truly innocent—it is impossible to grow up in
this world and retain total innocence. Yet Naturals yearn so deeply to hold
on to their innocent outlook that they manage to preserve the illusion of
innocence. They exaggerate their weakness to elicit the proper sympathy.
They act like they still see the world through innocent eyes, which in an
adult proves doubly humorous. Much of this is conscious, but to be effec-
tive, adult Naturals must make it seem subtle and effortless—if they are
seen as trying to act innocent, it will come across as pathetic. It is better for
them to communicate weakness indirectly, through looks and glances, or
through the situations they get themselves into, rather than anything obvi-
ous. Since this type of innocence is mostly an act, it is easily adaptable for
your own purposes. Learn to play up any natural weaknesses or flaws.
The imp. Impish children have a fearlessness that we adults have lost. That
is because they do not see the possible consequences of their actions—how
some people might be offended, how they might physically hurt themselves
in the process. Imps are brazen, blissfully uncaring. They infect you with
their lighthearted spirit. Such children have not yet had their natural energy
and spirit scolded out of them by the need to be polite and civil. Secretly,
we envy them; we want to be naughty too.
Adult imps are seductive because of how different they are from the rest
of us. Breaths of fresh air in a cautious world, they go full throttle, as ifsteal them. But, fearing to
be betrayed by their tracks,
he quickly made a number
oj shoes from the bark of a
fallen oak and tied them
until plaited grass to the
feet of the cows, which he
then drove off by night
along the road. Apollo
discovered the loss, but
Hermes's trick deceived
him, and though he went
as far as Pylus in his
westward search, and to
Onchestus in his eastern,
he was forced, in the end,
to offer a reward for the
apprehension of the thief.
Silenus and his satyrs,
greedy of reward, spread
out in different directions to
track him down but, for a
long while, without success.
At last, as a party of them
passed through Arcadia,
they heard the muffled
sound of music such as
they had never heard
before, and the nymph
Cyllene, from the mouth of
a cave, told them that a
most gifted child had
recently been born there, to
whom she was acting as
nurse: he had constructed
an ingenious musical toy
from the shell of a tortoise
and some cow-gut, with
which he had lulled his
mother to sleep. • "And
from whom did he get the
cow-gut?" asked the alert
satyrs, noticing two hides
stretched outside the cave.
"Do you charge the poor
child with theft?" asked
Cyllene. Harsh words were
exchanged. • At that
moment Apollo came up,
having discovered the
thief's identity by observing
the suspicious behaviour of
a long-winged bird.
Entering the cave, he
awakened Maia and told
her severely that Hermes
must restore the stolen
cows. Maia pointed to the
child, still wrapped in his
