Appendix B: Soft Seduction: How to Sell Anything to the Masses • 453
one seemed to know, but the public was too curious to care, and The Virgin
of Stamboul broke box office records.
A year later Harry was asked to publicize a film called The Forbidden
Woman. It was one of the worst movies he had ever seen. Theater owners
had no interest in showing it. Harry went to work. For eighteen days
straight he ran an ad in all of the major New York newspapers: WATCH THE
SKY ON THE NIGHT OF FEBRUARY 21ST! IF IT IS GREEN—GO THE CAPITOL IF
IT IS RED—GO THE RIVOLI IF IT IS PINK—GO TO THE STRAND IF IT IS BLUE—
GO TO THE RIALTO FOR ON FEBRUARY 21ST THE SKY WILL TELL YOU WHERE
THE BEST SHOW IN TOWN CAN BE SEEN! (The Capitol, the Rivoli, the
Strand, and the Rialto were the four big first-run movie houses on Broad-
way.) Almost everyone saw the ad and wondered what this fabulous show
was. The owner of the Capitol asked Harry if he knew anything about it,
and Harry let him in on the secret: it was all a publicity stunt for an un-
booked picture. The owner asked to see a screening of The Forbidden
Woman; through most of the film, Harry yakked about the publicity cam-
paign, distracting the man from the dullness onscreen. The theater owner
decided to show the film for a week, and so, on the evening of Febru-
ary 21, as a heavy snowstorm blanketed the city and all eyes turned to the
sky, giant rays of light poured out from the tallest buildings—a brilliant
show of green. An enormous crowd flocked to the Capitol theater. Those
who did not get in kept coming back. Somehow, with a packed house and
an excited crowd, the film did not seem quite so bad.
The following year Harry was asked to publicize a gangster picture
called Outside the Law. On high-ways across the country he set up billboards
that read, in giant letters, IF YOU DANCE ON SUNDAY, YOU ARE OUTSIDE THE
LAW. On other billboards the word "dance" was replaced by "play golf" or
"play pool" and so on. On a top corner of the billboards was a shield bear-
ing the initials "PD." The public assumed this meant "police department"
(actually, it stood for Priscilla Dean, the star of the movie) and that the
police, backed by religious organizations, were prepared to enforce
decades-old blue laws prohibiting "sinful" activities on a Sunday. Suddenly
a controversy was sparked. Theater owners, golfing associations, and dance
organizations led a countercampaign against the blue laws; they put up their
own billboards, exclaiming that if you did those things on Sunday, you
were not "OUTSIDE THE LAW" and issuing a call for Americans to have some
fun in their lives. For weeks the words "Outside the Law" were everywhere
seen and everywhere on people's lips. In the midst of this the film
opened—on a Sunday—in four New York theaters simultaneously, some-
thing that had never happened before. And it ran for months throughout
the country, also on Sundays. It was one of the big hits of the year.
Interpretation. Harry Reichenbach, perhaps the greatest press agent in
movie history, never forgot the lessons he had learned as a barker. The car-
nival is full of bright lights, color, noise, and the ebb and flow of the
454 • Appendix B: Soft Seduction: How to Sell Anything to the Masses
crowd. Such environments have profound effects on people. A clearheaded
person could probably tell that the magic shows are fake, the fierce animals
trained, the dangerous stunts relatively safe. But people want to be enter-
tained; it is one of their greatest needs. Surrounded by color and excite-
ment, they suspend their disbelief for a while and imagine that the magic
and danger are real. They are fascinated by what seems to be both fake and
real at the same time. Harry's publicity stunts merely re-created the carnival
on a larger scale. He pulled people in with the lure of colorful costumes, a
great story, irresistible spectacle. He held their attention with mystery, con-
troversy, whatever it took. Catching a kind of fever, as they would at the
carnival, they flocked without thinking to the films he publicized.
The lines between fiction and reality, news and entertainment are even
more blurred today than in Harry Reichenbach's time. What opportunities
that presents for soft seduction! The media is desperate for events with en-
tertainment value, inherent drama. Feed that need. The public has a weak-
ness for what seems both realistic and slightly fantastical—for real events
with a cinematic edge. Play to that weakness. Stage events the way Bernays
did, events the media can pick up as news. But here you are not starting a
social trend, you are after something more short term: to win people's at-
tention, to create a momentary stir, to lure them into your tent. Make your
events and publicity stunts plausible and somewhat realistic, but make their
colors a little brighter than usual, the characters larger than life, the drama
higher. Provide an edge of sex and danger. You are creating a confluence of
real life and fiction—the essence of any seduction.
It is not enough, however, to win people's attention: you need to hold
it long enough to hook them. This can always be done by sparking contro-
versy, the way Harry liked to stir up debates about morals. While the media
argues about the effect you are having on people's values, it is broadcasting
your name everywhere and inadvertently bestowing upon you the edge
that will make you so attractive to the public.
