The Erotic Regression
As adults we tend to overvalue our childhood. In their dependency and
powerlessness, children genuinely suffer, yet when we get older we
conveniently forget about that and sentimentalize the supposed paradise we
have left behind. We forget the pain and remember only the pleasure.
Why? Because the responsibilities of adult life are a burden so oppressive at
times that we secretly yearn for the dependency of childhood, for that per-
son who looked after our every need, assumed our cares and worries. This
daydream of ours has a strong erotic component, for the child's feeling of
being dependent on the parent is charged with sexual undertones. Give
people a sensation similar to that protected, dependent feeling of childhood
and they will project all kinds of fantasies onto you, including feelings of
love or sexual attraction that they will attribute to something else. We
won't admit it, but we long to regress, to shed our adult exterior and vent
the childish emotions that linger beneath the surface.
Early in his career, Sigmund Freud confronted a strange problem: many
of his female patients were falling in love with him. He thought he knew
what was happening: encouraged by Freud, the patient would delve into
her childhood, which of course was the source of her illness or neurosis.
She would talk about her relationship with her father, her earliest experi-
ences of tenderness and love, and also of neglect and abandonment. The
process would stir up powerful emotions and memories. In a way, she
would be transported back into her childhood. Intensifying this effect was
the fact that Freud himself said little and made himself a little cold and dis-
tant, although he seemed to be caring—in other words, quite like the tradi-
tional father figure. Meanwhile the patient was lying on a couch, in a
helpless or passive position, so that the situation duplicated the roles of par-
ent and child. Eventually she would begin to direct some of the confused
emotions she was dealing with toward Freud himself. Unaware of what was
happening, she would relate to him as to her father. She would regress and
fall in love. Freud called this phenomenon "transference," and it would be-
come an active part of his therapy. By getting patients to transfer some of
their repressed feelings onto the therapist, he would bring their problems
into the open, where they could be dealt with on a conscious level.
The transference effect was so potent, though, that Freud was often un-
able to move his patients past their infatuation. In fact transference is a
powerful way of creating an emotional attachment—the goal of any seduc-[In Japan,] much in the
traditional way of child-
rearing seems to foster
passive dependence. The
child is rarely left alone,
day or night, for it usually
sleeps with the mother.
When it goes out the child
is not pushed ahead in a
pram, to face the world
alone, but is tightly bound
to the mother's back in a
snug cocoon. When the
mother bows, the child does
too, so the social graces are
acquired automatically
while feeling the mother's
heartbeat. Thus emotional
security tends to depend
almost entirely on the
physical presence of the
mother. • . . . Children
learn that a show of
passive dependence is the
best way to get favors as
well as affection. There is a
verb for this in Japanese:
amaeru, translated in the
dictionary as "to presume
upon another's love; to
play the baby." According
to the psychiatrist Doi
Takeo this is the main key
to understanding the
Japanese personality. It
goes on in adult life too:
juniors do it to seniors in
companies, or any other
group, women do it to
men, men do it to their
335
336 • The Art of Seduction
tion. The method has infinite applications outside psychoanalysis. To prac-
tice it in real life, you need to play the therapist, encouraging people to talk
about their childhood. Most of us are only too happy to oblige; and our
memories are so vivid and emotional that a part of us regresses just in talk-
ing about our early years. Also, in the course of talking, little secrets slip
out: we reveal all kinds of valuable information about our weaknesses and
our mental makeup, information you must attend to and remember. Do
not take your targets' words at face value; they will often sugarcoat or over-
dramatize events in childhood. But pay attention to their tone of voice, to
any nervous tics as they talk, and particularly to anything they do not want
to talk about, anything they deny or that makes them emotional. Many state-
ments actually mean their opposite: should they say they hated their father,
for instance, you can be sure that they are hiding a lot of disappointment—
that they actually loved their father only too much, and perhaps never quite
got what they wanted from him. Listen closely for recurring themes and
stories. Most important, learn to analyze emotional responses and see what
lies behind them.
While they talk, maintain the therapist's pose—attentive but quiet,
making occasional, nonjudgmental comments. Be caring yet distant—
somewhat blank, in fact—and they will begin to transfer emotions and pro-
ject fantasies onto you. With the information you have gathered about their
childhood, and the trusting bond you have forged, you can now begin to
effect the regression. Perhaps you have uncovered a powerful attachment to
a parent, a sibling, a teacher, or any early infatuation, a person who casts a
shadow over their present lives. Knowing what it was about this person that
affected them so powerfully, you can now take over that role. Or perhaps
you have learned of an immense gap in their childhood—a neglectful fa-
ther, for instance. You act like that parent now, but you replace the original
neglect with the attention and affection that the real parent never supplied.
Everyone has unfinished business from childhood—disappointments, lacks,
painful memories. Finish what is unfinished. Discover what your target
never got and you have the ingredients for a deep-rooted seduction.
The key is not just to talk about memories—that is weak. What you
want is to get people to act out in their present old issues from their past,
without their being aware of what is happening. The regressions you can
effect fall into four main types.
The Infantile Regression. The first bond—the bond between a mother
and her infant—is the most powerful one. Unlike other animals, human ba-
bies have a long period of helplessness during which they are dependent on
their mother, creating an attachment that influences the rest of their lives.
The key to effecting this regression is to reproduce the sense of uncondi-
tional love a mother has for her child. Never judge your targets—let them
do whatever they want, including behaving badly; at the same time sur-
round them with loving attention, smother them with comfort. A part ofmothers, and sometimes
wives. ...•... A
magazine called Young
Lady featured an article
(January 1982) on "how
to make ourselves
beautiful." How, in other
words, to attract men. An
American or European
magazine would then go
on to tell the reader how to
be sexually desirable, no
doubt suggesting various
puffs, creams, and sprays.
Not so with Young Lady.
"The most attractive
women," it informs us,
"are women full of
maternal love. Women
without maternal love are
the types men never want
to marry. . . . One has to
look at men through the
eyes of a mother. "
—IAN BURUMA, BEHIND THE
MASK: ON SEXUAL DEMONS,
SACRED MOTHERS,
TRANSVESTITES, GANGSTERS,
DRIFTERS AND OTHER
JAPANESE CULTURAL HEROES
I have stressed the fact that
the beloved person is a
substitute for the ideal ego.
Two people who love each
other are interchanging
. their ego-ideals. That they
love each other means they
love the ideal of themselves
in the other one. There
would be no love on earth
if this phantom were not
there. We fall in love
because we cannot attain
the image that is our better
self and the best of our self
From this concept it is
obvious that love itself is
only possible on a certain
cultural level or after a
certain phase in the
development of the
personality has been
reached. The creation of an
ego-ideal itself marks
human progress. When
people are entirely satisfied
