was no longer about cheating but about Mom making unwarranted
accusations.
Mom could have prevented her daughter from going to the Land of Is by
ﬁrst recognizing that the technique was being used and then redirecting the
conversation back to the initial topic of inquiry. For example:
MOM: Your teacher called this afternoon and told me that she suspected you of cheating on an
exam. Did you cheat on your exam?
DAUGHTER: I spend two hours a night studying. I study more than anybody I know. People
who don’t study are the people who have to cheat on exams. I study all the time. Don’t accuse
me of cheating!
MOM: I know you study hard and get good grades. at’s not what I asked you. I asked you
whether or not you cheated on your exam. Did you cheat on your exam?
Redirecting the conversation back to the initial question forced her
daughter to answer the question, “Did you cheat on your exam?” Her daughter
must answer yes or no or take her mother back to the Land of Is. Failure to
answer a yes-or-no question with a yes-or-no answer is not conclusive proof of
deception, but the probability of deception does increase signiﬁcantly. If her
daughter did not cheat on her exam, answering no would not be diﬃcult. e
truth is simple. e truth is direct.  e truth is not complicated.
WHY SHOULD I BELIEVE YOU?
When someone provides you with an answer to a question, simply ask them
“Why should I believe you?” Honest people typically answer, “Because I am
telling the truth” or some derivation thereof. Truthful people simply convey
information. ey focus on accurately presenting facts. Conversely, liars try to
convince people that what is being said is true. eir focus is not on accurately
presenting facts, but rather, on convincing listeners that the facts presented
represent the truth. Since liars cannot rely on facts to establish their credibility,
they tend to bolster their credibility to make their version of the facts appear
believable.
When people answer with other than “Because I’m telling the truth” or
some derivation thereof, tell them that their response did not answer the
question and repeat the question, “Why should I believe you?” If they again do
not respond with “Because I’m telling the truth” or some derivation thereof,
the probability of deception increases. e following exchange between a dad
and his son demonstrates the Why Should I Believe You technique.
DAD: ere was ten dollars on my dresser this morning. It’s no longer there. Did you take
money from my dresser for any reason?
SON: No.
DAD: Son, I want to believe you. But I’m having a hard time. Tell me. Why should I believe
you?
SON: I’m not a thief.
DAD: I didn’t ask you if you were a thief or not. I asked you why I should believe you. Why
should I believe you?
SON: Because I didn’t steal the money. I’m telling you the truth.
DAD: I know you are and I believe you.
In this exchange, the son responded that he was not a thief. is response
did not answer the question “Why should I believe you?” Dad gave his son a
second chance by telling him that the question was not whether he was a thief
but rather “Why should I believe you?” is time the son answered, “Because I
didn’t steal the money. I’m telling you the truth,” which indicates the son was
probably telling the truth. e fact that the son correctly answered the
question “Why should I believe you” does not mean he told the truth, but it
does decrease the likelihood of deception.
When you communicate with people, especially on the Internet by instant
messaging or by texting on a smartphone, use these simple, noninvasive
techniques to test the person’s veracity. ese techniques are so subtle that the
people you are communicating with will not even recognize that they are being
tested for veracity. Although these techniques are only indicators of deception,
not proof of deception, they do provide you with a strong line of defense
against online predators.
DETECTING DECEPTION IN ONLINE PROF ILES
Most people do not accurately describe themselves in online proﬁles, especially
dating proﬁles. Researchers Toma, Hancock, and Ellison surveyed eighty
people who submitted online proﬁles to various dating websites. An
astounding 81 percent of the online daters lied about one or more of their
physical attributes, which included height, weight, and age. Women tended to
lie about their weight and men tended to lie about their height. Women whose
