became his. Vladimir took the initiative. Even then, I did not immediately
begin talking with him; instead, I reminded him that when we ﬁrst met, he
vowed never to talk. In addition to the Friendship Formula, this introduced
two psychological principles that will be discussed later in the book, “the
principle of scarcity” and the “principle of increased restraint increases drive.”
In simple terms, I did not readily make myself available to Vladimir, which
heightened his curiosity, causing an increase in his motivation to talk. Once
Vladimir opened his personal and psychological space to me, I was able to use
the rapport-building techniques discussed throughout this book to bring him
to the point where he willingly provided me with information.
To eﬀectively use the Friendship Formula, you have to keep in mind what
kind of relationship you are looking to establish and the time you will be
required to spend with your person of interest. Obviously, the formula will not
play a major role in getting someone to like you if you are only going to see
them once or sporadically. To illustrate: Say you’re in Cleveland, Ohio, for a
one-day conference and you meet this particularly attractive man or woman
(you choose which is appropriate) and want to spend the evening with him or
her. When you give the person a friend signal, it is not reciprocated; in fact,
the person goes “shields up.” At this point, you’re not going to get anywhere
with this individual; not tonight, anyway. But, according to the Friendship
Formula, if you end up moving to Cleveland, you might still be able to win
this person over using proximity, frequency, duration, and intensity to develop
a relationship.
THE FRIEND-FOE CONTINUUM
When two people meet each other for the ﬁrst time (assuming neither person
knows anything about the other person), they are strangers. Imagine yourself
walking down the street in a town where you don’t know anybody and people
are moving around you as they head toward their destinations. Or think of
yourself in a bar or restaurant or other public building where you are among
dozens of people unfamiliar to you. In these cases, you are in the “stranger”
zone of the continuum. You are a stranger to those around you, as they are
strangers to you.
Most human interactions remain in the stranger zone. We hardly take
notice of the hundreds, even thousands, of personal contacts we experience in
our daily lives as we go about our business. Yet, sometimes a stranger does
something that makes us take notice of his or her presence; we become aware
of this individual. It doesn’t have to be something obvious. In fact, at ﬁrst we
might not even understand why a particular person has “caught our attention.”
So, what makes a stranger suddenly stand out and become a person of
interest? ey have been picked up by, for lack of a better name, your brain’s
territory scan. Scientists have discovered that as we go about our daily lives, our
senses are constantly sending messages to our brain, which, in turn, processes
the information to assess, among other things, if any given individual in our
range of observation can be ignored, is worthy of approach, or is someone to
avoid. is process is automatic or “hardwired” into our brains and is based on
the brain’s capacity to interpret speciﬁc nonverbal and verbal behaviors as
either “friend,” “neutral,” or “foe” signals.
e function of the “territory scan” can be described using the following
analogy. A woman is walking up and down a stretch of oceanfront beach. As
she moves, she holds a metal detector in front of her, sweeping it left to right,
side to side. Most of her walk is uninterrupted; the metal detector has not
“picked up” anything of interest lying beneath the sand. But, every so often,
the machine will beep and the woman will stop and dig in the sand to discover
what is buried there. What she ﬁnds might be treasure . . . an expensive watch
or a valuable coin. Or it could be trash . . . a discarded can or tin foil. If she is
extremely unlucky, it could be some long-forgotten land mine just waiting to
be detonated.
Your brain is like the metal detector, constantly evaluating your
environment for signals that indicate things you should approach or avoid, or
that are irrelevant and can be ignored. Behavioral scientists have spent decades
discovering, cataloging, and describing the kinds of human behaviors the brain
interprets as “friend” or “foe” signals. Once you know what the signals are, you
will be able to use them to make friends and, as a collateral beneﬁt, keep
people away from you that you would like to avoid.
