CONTEMPORANEOUS EXPERIENCE
A contemporaneous experience means that you and the person you just met
share the same interests or attitudes. For example, if you spot someone wearing
a shirt with a Chicago White Sox logo and you are a White Sox fan, then you
share a contemporaneous interest in that team. However, just because someone
is wearing a White Sox shirt does not automatically mean he or she is a White
Sox fan. In addition to building rapport, empathic statements can be used to
explore observations or hypotheses you may develop regarding the person you
just met. Consider the following conversation:
BRYAN: Hi, my name is Bryan. What’s yours?
CHRISTINE: Christine.
BRYAN: So you must be a White sox fan. (empathic statement)
CHRISTINE: I’ve been a Sox fan all of my life.
BRYAN: Me too.
By using an empathic statement, Bryan learned that both he and Christine
were passionate about the White Sox. Once common ground has been
established, Bryan can now focus on that topic and the conversation will ﬂow
naturally. If Brian is not a Sox fan, he could retreat to their shared general
interest in baseball, as in this exchange:
BRYAN: Hi, my name is Bryan. What’s yours?
CHRISTINE: Christine.
BRYAN: So you must be a White Sox fan. (empathic statement)
CHRISTINE: I’ve been a Sox fan all my life.
BRYAN: I like baseball, but I’m a Cubs fan.
CHRISTINE: Oh, I don’t follow minor-league baseball.
(Note: It’s obvious that Christine, besides having a sense of humor, has
disdain for her favorite team’s crosstown rival!) Once it has been established
that Christine and Bryan share an interest in baseball but root for diﬀerent
teams, Bryan could use that information to spark a lively conversation on the
pros and cons of each ball club.
People who share the same hometowns can quickly build friendships,
especially when they meet outside those geographical boundaries. Shared job
interests, political positions, religious beliefs, mutual friends, and similar
experiences are good topics to explore for common ground.
If you are having a diﬃcult time ﬁnding contemporaneous common
ground, talk about music. As mentioned earlier, the one thing that most
people have in common with each other is music. Music is a neutral topic that
most people are willing to talk about, even if their listening tastes diﬀer.
TEMPORAL EXPERIENCES
Experiences shared across time, such as attendance at the same school, military
service, or living in the same area, enhance opportunities for making friends.
You may not have shared the experiences at the same time, but you can reach
across time to seek common ground.
VICARIOUS EXPERIENCES
A vicarious experience occurs when you live out a lifestyle or activity through
the revelations of another person. You can use vicarious experiences to establish
common ground with another person even when, in reality, you know very
little about the subject matter being discussed. is approach is particularly
eﬀective because it allows your person of interest to talk about themselves and
something they most likely are interested in. is makes them feel good about
themselves, and because you are the one providing the impetus for that feeling,
you are seen in a positive light (the Golden Rule of Friendship in action). is
is a favorite technique for salespeople to use because they can ﬁnd common
ground with a customer even when they don’t know much about what the
customer is talking about. Here is an example:
CAR SALESPERSON: What do you do for a living?
CUSTOMER: I’m a baker.
CAR SALESPERSON: Really? My father was a baker.
e car salesperson doesn’t have to know anything about being a baker
because his father was a baker. You can use the same technique to seek
common ground when you meet someone for the ﬁrst time.
AUDREY: Where do you work?
SUSAN: I’m a ﬁnancial planner.
AUDREY: Interesting. My sister is an accountant.
