statement. You should continue constructing empathic statements until the
other person’s anger is spent. Sighs, long exhales, slumping shoulders, and
downward glances signal spent anger. At this juncture, you should introduce
the presumptive statement.
Presumptive Statements
Presumptive statements direct angry people to take a course of action that leads
toward conﬂict resolution. Presumptive statements are constructed in such a
fashion that angry people have diﬃculty not following the directed course of
action. Constructing presumptive statements requires practiced critical
listening skills. e presumptive statement turns the force of the anger toward
a resolution that is acceptable for both parties.
Let’s return to my awkward homecoming discussed previously. After a series
of empathic statements, my wife’s anger burned oﬀ. She let out a great sigh and
her shoulders slumped. Her anger was spent. Now was the time to present a
presumptive statement to direct her to take a course of action that would bring
a resolution. I constructed the following presumptive statement: “Why don’t I
gather the kids up and take them to my mom’s house and we’ll go out to a nice
restaurant? You deserve it.” My wife would have had a diﬃcult time not
following the course of action I presented. If she rejected my suggested course
of action, she would have to admit that she didn’t deserve to go to a nice
restaurant, that she didn’t feel overwhelmed, and that she didn’t need a break
from the kids, which are the very things she expressed as she vented her anger.
Using this technique, I eﬀectively resolved a situation that could have easily
escalated into a major domestic dispute, which would have left us both angry
and frustrated.
If an angry person rejects the presumptive statement, you should begin the
breaking of the anger cycle again with a new empathic statement. If my wife
had rejected my suggested course of action, our conversation might have gone
something like this:
ME: Why don’t I gather the kids up and take them to my mom’s house and we’ll go out to a nice
restaurant? You deserve it. (presumptive statement)
MY WIFE: You’re not getting oﬀ that easy, Mister. (rejection of the presumptive statement)
ME: So you think one night out is not enough to make up for the work you did while I was
gone. (empathic statement; reentering breaking the anger cycle)
Rejection of the presumptive statement typically indicates that the person
has not completely vented his or her anger. Reentering breaking the anger cycle
allows the person to vent any residual anger. Some people have deep-seated
anger issues that may never be resolved. In these cases, the best course of action
you could oﬀer is to agree to disagree or you could both agree not to bring the
sensitive topic up again. ese possible resolutions set boundaries for your
relationships, not abruptly end them.
e anger cycle can be used in virtually all situations when you are
confronted by angry people. e following exchange between a customs oﬃcer
and a foreign visitor illustrates the use of the anger cycle to resolve a dispute.
CUSTOMS OFFICER: Ma’am, you can’t bring dirt into this country.
VISITOR: It is sacred dirt from a holy place. I will not give it up!
CUSTOMS OFFICER: So, you don’t want to give up the dirt because it is special to you.
(empathic statement)
VISITOR: Of course, it’s special. It’s blessed ground. It keeps evil spirits away. It protects me
from illness. I will not give it up and you can’t make me! (venting)
CUSTOMS OFFICER: is dirt fends oﬀ evil spirits and keeps you healthy. (empathic
statement)
VISITOR: I haven’t been sick even once since I got the dirt. I really need it. (venting)
CUSTOMERS OFFICER: Staying healthy means a lot to you. (empathic statement)
VISITOR: Yes, it does. (a sigh accompanied by a shoulder drop)
CUSTOMS OFFICER: Let’s work together to come up with a solution to this problem.
(presumptive statement) Would you like that?” (e visitor cannot say “No” without
appearing unreasonable.)
VISITOR: Of course.
CUSTOMS OFFICER: e regulation states that you cannot bring dirt into the country
because the microbes in the dirt could infest crops. (provides an explanation) I’m sure you
don’t want to be responsible for making millions of people sick, do you? (presumptive
statement) (e visitor cannot say “Yes” without appearing unreasonable.)
CUSTOMS OFFICER: Give me the dirt and you will be able to begin your visit to the United
States.
VISITOR: If I have to, okay. (voluntary compliance)
REENTERING THE ANGER CYCLE
In the event the visitor remained angry and did not voluntarily give up the
dirt, the customs oﬃcer would reenter the anger cycle in an attempt to break
it. e following exchange demonstrates reentry into the cycle.
