EYE ROLLS
Rolling your eyes at someone is a “foe signal” that discourages further
interaction. It sends the message you think the individual is stupid or that his
or her actions are inappropriate. If, for instance, you are in a large group and
spot someone saying something you think is dumb, you might roll your eyes in
response. If the person who made the comment sees you doing this, it
predisposes them to respond negatively to you in any future interactions. is
holds true whether you are a stranger or are known to that individual.
WATCH FOR EYE ROLL
Watching for eye rolls at meetings can be an entertaining way to pass the time,
and can provide information about where people stand on speciﬁc issues.
When people disagree with a comment or proposal, they will often roll their
eyes when the person who made the comment or proposal turns away or looks
at his or her notes. is nonverbal signal identiﬁes who is not receptive to what
is being said.
If you make a comment and catch somebody rolling their eyes, focus your
attention on that person to try to convince them your idea has merit.
Remember: You don’t have to spend time trying to convince the choir, the
ones who are nodding their approval, leaning forward, and smiling.
SQUINTING OF THE EYES
is foe signal is not as powerful as other foe cues are, but can still have a
chilling eﬀect on personal relationships. If the squinting is due to factors such
as looking into bright illumination, it might be wrongly interpreted.
FURROWED EYEBROWS
is is another common foe signal, assuming it is not due to someone being in
deep concentration. is nonverbal cue is often associated with disapproval,
uncertainty, or anger.
Furrowed eyebrows
FACIAL TENSION
Tightened jaw muscles, narrowing of the eyes, and furrowed eyebrows are a
cluster of nonverbal foe signals that can be seen from a distance and serve as
early warning indicators to alert you to the possibility that the person you are
about to meet may pose a threat. Displaying foe signals makes meaningful
communication diﬃcult, especially in new relationships. Facial tension can be
easily misinterpreted because people often carry over tensions from their jobs
or home lives to social situations, causing new friends or even old ones to take
note and become unnecessarily guarded and apprehensive.
AGGRESSIVE STANCE
A wide stance with arms akimbo (hands on hips) is a foe signal. A wide stance
lowers the body’s center of gravity and is used by a person preparing for a ﬁght.
Arms akimbo widens a person’s proﬁle in an attempt to display dominance.
ATTACK SIGNALS
