It is imperative when confronting an angry individual to take “time oﬀ to
cool oﬀ.” One writer suggests that when dealing with an angry friend,
colleague, or partner you should “go to the balcony.” is is another way of
indicating that you need to step back from the ﬁre and let things cool oﬀ a bit
before returning to the ﬂames.
In many instances, providing a simple explanation can assuage anger. People
want to feel like they are in control. Angry people seek order in a world that no
longer makes sense to them. e inability to make sense of a disordered world
causes frustration. is frustration is expressed as anger. Providing an
explanation for a given behavior or problem will often reorder a disordered
world and soothe the angered person’s feelings in the process. e following
exchange between a super visor and a subordinate demonstrates the use of this
technique:
SUPERVISOR: I expected you to have your report done by this morning. Your behavior is
unacceptable. (anger)
EMPLOYEE: I couldn’t complete the report because I didn’t receive the data from the sales
department. ey said they would send it within the hour. (provide an explanation)
SUPERVISOR: All right. Get the report ﬁnished as soon as possible. (anger resolution)
If angry people do not accept the simple explanation for a problem, the
potential for verbal escalation increases signiﬁcantly. Anger needs fuel. e
increased anger provokes you to give a more intense response, which provides
additional fuel to an angry supervisor. If this anger cycle continues, at some
point your ﬁght or ﬂight threshold is crossed, causing a reduction in your
ability to think logically. Problem solving becomes impossible when both you
and the other person get caught up in the anger cycle.
Try the “Big Three” Approach to Breaking the Anger Cycle: Empathic
Statements, Venting, and Presumptive Statements
Empathic statements capture a person’s verbal message, physical status, or
emotions, and using parallel language, reﬂect them back to the speaker.
Venting reduces frustration. Once angry people are provided a chance to vent
their frustrations, they become more open to solutions because they think
more clearly when they are not angry. Presumptive statements direct angry
people to take a course of action that leads toward the resolution of the conﬂict
that aroused their ire in the ﬁrst place. Presumptive statements are constructed
in such a fashion that angry individuals have diﬃculty not following the
directed (recommended) course of action. e following dialogue
demonstrates the big-three approach to breaking the anger cycle.
SUPERVISOR: I expected you to have your report done by this morning. Your behavior is
unacceptable. (anger)
EMPLOYEE: I couldn’t complete the report because I didn’t receive the data from the sales
department. ey said they would send it within the hour. (provide an explanation)
SUPERVISOR: at’s no excuse. You should have gone to the sales department to get the
report. You knew how important it was to get the report done by this morning. I have a
meeting with the client this afternoon. I’m not sure what I’m going to do. (rejecting the
explanation)
EMPLOYEE: You’re upset because the client is expecting the report this afternoon. (empathic
statement)
SUPERVISOR: Yeah. You’re making me look bad. (venting)
EMPLOYEE: You’re disappointed because you expected me to have the report ﬁnished this
morning. (empathic statement)
SUPERVISOR: Exactly. at’s an understatement. (shoulders droop accompanied by a deep
exhale; venting completed)
EMPLOYEE: I’ll go get the sales report now and get you the report before your meeting this
afternoon. (presumptive statement)
SUPERVISOR: Okay. See what you can do. (anger resolution)
A CLOSER LOOK AT HOW THE “BIG THREE” WORK TO “BREAK THE ANGER
CYCLE”
Empathic Statements
In breaking the anger cycle, empathic statements are invaluable. When an
angry person ﬁrst hears an empathic statement it can be surprising and
confusing. When not expected, it can initially cause suspicion, but when
sustained it is diﬃcult not to appreciate the concern it represents. Empathy
thus quickly leads to trust.
e more you can empathize, the more you can get immediate feedback on
what a person is thinking about what you are saying to them. As a
consequence, you can modify what you are saying and doing if you see your
initial approach is not working.
e question is: How do you do this? How do you empathize eﬀectively?
How do you ﬁnd out what other people are feeling? All you have to go on is
