neighbor, Bill, is not very trustworthy; in fact, when you shake hands, check
your ﬁngers to make sure he hasn’t taken any.” How are you going to view Bill
when you ﬁrst are introduced? e problem is you have already been
encouraged to prejudge him as untrustworthy through what behavioral
scientists refer to as the “primacy eﬀect.” If a friend describes the person you
are about to meet for the ﬁrst time as untrustworthy, you will be predisposed
to view that person as untrustworthy, regardless of the person’s actual level of
trustworthiness. ereafter, you will tend to view everything that person says
or does as untrustworthy.
Conversely, say your friend Calvin tells you that your new neighbor, Bill, “is
very friendly, gregarious, and has a great sense of humor . . . you’re going to
love him.” How are you going to view Bill now? You will likely see Bill as
friendly, regardless of his degree of friendliness.
Overcoming negative or positive perceptions you might have toward a
speciﬁc individual because of what you were told by someone else (particularly
if you respect and/or like that person) is diﬃcult, but not impossible to
achieve. e more times you meet the “untrustworthy” Bill and do not
experience instances of untrustworthiness, the more likely you are to see him as
trustworthy, thus overcoming the original negativity created by the primacy
eﬀect. However, you are less likely to give a person labeled “untrustworthy” a
chance to prove the label wrong because your desire to see the person a second
time will be reduced.
If you meet the “friendly” Bill several times and do not experience
friendliness, then you will tend to excuse away the unfriendly behavior. Such
excuses might include “He must be having a bad day” or “I must have caught
him at a bad time.” An unfriendly person initially described as friendly gains
an advantage from the primacy eﬀect because people tend to allow the
unfriendly person multiple opportunities to demonstrate friendliness despite
numerous displays of unfriendly behavior.
It is precisely because the primacy eﬀect can be so powerful that we can use
it as one of our tools for shaping friendships or getting people to see us as we
want to be seen. What you are doing with the primacy eﬀect is sending a
message that will predispose somebody to see someone else in a way that you
want them to be perceived.
TAKING THE PRIMACY EFFECT TO THE BANK
I often employed the primacy eﬀect during interrogations of people suspected
of committing crimes. I remember one case where we were interviewing a
possible bank robber. ere were two of us and the suspect sitting in the
interrogation room. Early in the interview, my partner excused himself, saying
he had to make a telephone call. Actually, his departure was part of our plan
that allowed me to be alone with the suspect so I could speak with him
privately.
I told the suspect, “You’re lucky to have my partner on the job. He’s honest
and fair. He’ll listen without prejudice to your side of the story.” en I sat
back, waiting for my partner to return. A few moments later, before he actually
returned, I added, “e thing about my partner—I guess he can aﬀord to be
fair. e guy’s a human lie detector. I don’t know how he does it, but he knows
when someone is lying. No matter what the subject is or who is talking, the
man can tell if someone is being dishonest.” What I did through my last
comment was to create a ﬁlter through which I wanted the suspect to view my
partner. I employed the primacy eﬀect to shape his assessment of my partner’s
skills.
When my partner returned to the room, he already knew that he was to
remain silent until I asked the suspect, “Did you rob the bank?” If the man
said, “No,” my partner was instructed to look at the suspect like “You’ve got to
be kidding” and give him a skeptical look.
So, what happened? I asked the guy, “Did you rob the bank?” and he said,
“No.” My partner responded by saying, “What?” with a skeptical look. And—
this is the truth—the suspect took his hand, slapped it on the table, and said,
“Damn, he’s good!” and went on to confess to the crime.
BEWARE OF THE PRIMACY EFFECT IN BIASING YOUR OWN BEHAVIOR
Using the primacy eﬀect is a great idea when you’re using it to inﬂuence others,
but be aware that it can cut both ways. If you’re not careful, the primacy eﬀect
can cause you to be prejudicial in your own behavior toward others, leading to
inaccurate and misleading beliefs about their behavior.
