evaluate others more accurately. Visual meetings expose catphish and level the
Internet relationship playing ﬁeld.
A NEW GENERATION: TURN ON, TUNE IN, AND TAKE PRECAUTIONS
ere is simply no denying that the advent of person-to-person online
communication has dramatically altered the landscape of seeking friends and
building relationships. As online interaction continues to grow in popularity it
will have an even greater impact on the way people form relationships in the
years to come.
By being aware of the Internet dangers mentioned above, and using the
techniques I recommend to minimize them, meaningful Internet relationships
are possible. In fact, for reasons listed at the beginning of this chapter, they
might be the preferred method for connecting with people in the initial stage
of relationship building.
Used with appropriate caution and common sense, the Internet is another
tool in your friendship toolbox for ﬁnding and developing friendships for a
moment or a lifetime. Conversely, if you use the tool carelessly, with a
disregard for what is inputted and downloaded, it can lead to disappointment
and potential personal disasters. In the ﬁnal analysis, how you use the digital
universe will determine its ultimate value, good or bad, in shaping the quality
of your life and your relationships.
EPILOGUE
The Friendship Formula in Practice
And as every spy knows, common enemies are how allies always begin.
—ALLY CARTER, DON’T JUDGE A GIRL BY HER COVER
Here is one ﬁnal spy story. is one didn’t involve my time at the FBI; in fact,
it is more than a hundred years old.I e story begins at the turn of the last
century, when a German prince had a romantic rendezvous with a woman of
royalty from England. e sexual nature of the rendezvous was not that
disturbing to the German government; however, they were extremely unhappy
when they discovered the prince had written his paramour love letters ﬁlled
with state secrets. ey turned to “Dr. Graves,” a talented German spy, and
gave him his marching orders: “Get those letters back!”
And so he did. He traveled to England to meet this woman and reclaim the
prince’s love letters for his homeland. Printed on the following pages are
excerpts from Dr. Graves’s diary explaining how he accomplished his mission.
As you read the material, see if you can identify the Like Switch strategies Dr.
Graves utilized to successfully retrieve the letters.
I quartered myself at ﬁrst at the Russell Square Hotel, in a few days
transferring to the patrician Langham. I began by making tentative
inquiries. I purchased all society papers which I read from cover to cover,
and then carefully feeling my way put further questions that would locate
the set in which my lady was a central ﬁgure. From acquaintances I made
around the hotel, from the society reporters of newspapers, I began to get
little scraps of information. Fortunately, it was the season in London and
everybody was coming into town. I soon knew who the Lady’s intimates
