were and their favorite rendezvous. e next step was to become familiar
with the personality of the lady and to gain some idea as to her habits and
her likes and dislikes. I heard that the lady was in the habit of going
horseback riding in Hyde Park. Every day I made it my business to take a
two hour canter along the bridle path. My patience was rewarded on the
ﬁfth morning for I saw her galloping by with a party of friends.
e next morning I was on the bridle path at the same hour. Finally,
she came galloping along with the same group, and after they had almost
gone from sight, I galloped after them. I found out where they kept their
horses and after they had dismounted, I sauntered up to the stable and
made inquiries. I learned that they always went out at the same time of
day. ereafter, I made it my business to pass the lady on the bridle path
day after day. I pride myself on few things, but my horsemanship is one
of them. Many a hard tussle and bleeding nose I got riding Brumbies
(wild horses) across the wild tracks of Australia. I also learned a trick or
two among my Tuareg friends, which I exhibited for the lady’s beneﬁt on
various occasions. I did not hope to gain an introduction, but only to
attract attention and familiarize her party with my appearance, applying
one of the test points of human psychology. I employed the theory of the
subconscious attraction of an oft seen though unknown face.
I soon ascertained that my lady and her friends followed all the whims
of London society. One in particular interested me. ey were in the
habit of frequenting Carlton Terrace between three and four every
afternoon and eating strawberries. I also went to eat straw berries.
Carlton Terrace during the strawberry season is an exquisitely colored
fashion plate of life’s butterﬂies and drones. is throng of fashion and
beauty, marked with its air of distinction carelessly abandoned to
pleasure, ever murmuring pleasant nothings and tossing light persiﬂage
from table to table, is truly an interesting study of the lighter sides of life.
One sits on a magniﬁcent marquee-covered glass enclosed terrace
overlooking the ames with its ever changing scenes of fussy tugs and
squat barges.
At Carlton Terrace one pays well for the subtleties of eating. By
courteous consideration of the waitresses, I managed to secure a much
coveted outside corner table near to the one reserved for the lady and her
party. I always made it a point to withhold my entrance until the lady was
in the terrace; then I would stroll in alone, take a seat alone, and show a
desire to be alone. ey have a very clever way of serving strawberries at
the Carlton. A vine growing from ten to twelve large luscious berries is
brought on in a silver pot. It is the acme of luxury. You pick the fresh
berries from the vine on your table, the Terrace supplies quantities of
cream, and you pay half a sovereign—$2.50—f or a dish of strawberries.
One dish is enough for the average customer. Every afternoon I ordered
ﬁve.
Day after day, I consumed in strawberries two sovereigns and a half—
$12.50—of the Grand Duke of Mecklenburg-Schwerein’s money. Always
tipping the girl a half sovereign which made my daily strawberry bill
come up to three sovereigns ($15). For about ten days, I did this always at
the same time; always being careful to make my entrance after the lady’s
party was seated, always ordering the same number of portions, always
giving the girl the same tip. It wasn’t long before I began to be observed. I
soon saw that not only the attendants but also the patrons of the Terrace
were becoming interested in my foible. One day as I passed, I heard
someone say, “Here comes the strawberry ﬁend.”
I was satisﬁed. I knew it would be easy now to eﬀect an entrance to
the lady’s set. I had been marked as something out of the usual in the
restaurant that from three to four in the afternoon at that time of the year
is the most fashionable in London. Now, a woman like my lady does not
ﬂirt. If you glance at her under favorable conditions such as my
strawberry “stunt” had created for me she will return the glance. You both
half smile and do not look at each other again that afternoon. at is not
ﬂirting. Splitting hairs, we shall call it psychic interest.
I continued my strawberry festival and one day a manager of Carlton
Terrace told me that people were making inquiries about me. Several men
had wanted to know who I was. Under questioning, he told me that one
of the men was a member of the lady’s set. It was easy to put together two
and two. Obviously, the inquiry had been inspired by her.
