the one who felt guilty. It took ten years to know if my strategy worked or not.
I was relieved to know that it did.
THE LAW OF THE ROCKY ROAD
When two people meet and do not immediately like one another, especially in
a romantic context, and then bond at a later time, they form a closer
relationship than if they had hit it oﬀ immediately. is phenomenon is
frequently highlighted in “romcom” (romantic comedy) movies. In the usual
scenario, a man meets a woman. e man does not like the woman and the
woman doesn’t like the man. Before the ﬁlm ends, they become romantically
involved. A romantic rocky road often leads to a more intense romantic
relationship.
A NEW STRATEGY TO BUTTERING UP THE BOSS: BUTTERING DOW N THE
BOSS
I recall a time when I was assigned to a new supervisor. Instead of welcoming
her with open arms, as did the rest of my squad mates, I purposefully remained
distant and displayed neutral to slightly negative body language. Gradually,
with each conversation we had, I began to display more positive nonverbal
cues. I completed the turnaround several months later by telling her I thought
she was a good supervisor and respected her strong managerial skills. From that
day forward, we formed a closer relationship than if I had immediately
accepted her. is closer relationship provided me with a distinct advantage
when I asked for scarce investigative resources, time oﬀ, and other favors.
THE LAW OF PERSONALITY
ere are literally hundreds of personality “types” or “characteristics” that have
been identiﬁed in scientiﬁc and popular literature. ey refer to consistent
behavioral patterns exhibited by an individual in his or her everyday behavior.
When somebody says, “that individual just isn’t my type,” they might be
commenting on the person’s physical appearance or strongly held beliefs (for
example, religious or political). However, in many cases they are referring to
the individual’s personality, which is incongruent with their own.
Two pervasive personality types, extroversion and introversion, are of
particular interest when it comes to personal interaction and the development
of both short- and long-term relationships.
Extroverts, as compared to introverts, appear more attractive because they
are seen as gregarious and self-conﬁdent. Prior to entering into any type of
relationship, knowing whether the person you want to meet tends toward
extroversion or introversion is useful information as it will give you an idea of
what types of behavior you can expect to encounter.
If you are an extrovert and the person you want to meet is an intro vert,
expect to see some inherent diﬀerences in the way each of you perceives the
world. Extroverts get their energy from being with other people and seek
stimulation from their environments. Extroverts often speak spontaneously
without thinking. ey do not hesitate to use a trial-and-error method to
arrive at a decision. Conversely, introverts expend energy when they engage
socially and seek alone time to recharge their batteries. Introverts seek
stimulation from within and seldom speak without thinking. ey also
carefully weigh options before making decisions.
Extroverts maintain a wide variety of relationships; however, those
relationships tend to be relatively shallow. Introverts, on the other hand, have
few relationships, but they are characterized by greater depth. Introverts who
date extroverts typically seek a closer relationship to which extroverts are less
willing to commit. is inability to reach a mutually satisfying level of
commitment highlights dissimilarity, which ultimately reduces mutual
attraction.
Extroverts use stream of consciousness to communicate. What they think,
they say. is spontaneity often gets extroverts into trouble, particularly with
introverts who think before they speak and are more easily embarrassed by
what they consider to be personal information when it is blurted out by an
extroverted companion. If you are an introvert who is thinking of becoming
involved with an extrovert, be prepared for the unexpected when it comes to
the words that come tumbling out of their mouth.
