Finally, he asked why I kept coming daily to see him. I folded the
newspaper, looked at him, and said, “Because I want to talk to you.” I
immediately returned the newspaper to the upright position and continued
reading, ignoring Vladimir. After a while, I got up and left without saying
another word.
On the following day, Vladimir again asked me why I came every day and
read the newspaper. I again told him that I came because I wanted to talk to
him. I sat down and opened the newspaper. A few minutes later, Vladimir said,
“I want to talk.” I put the newspaper down and said, “Vladimir, are you sure
you want to talk to me? When we ﬁrst met, you told me that you would never
speak to me.” Vladimir replied, “I want to talk to you, but not about spying.” I
agreed to this condition but added, “You will let me know when you are ready
to talk about your spying activitie s, won’t you?” Vladimir agreed.
Over the next month, Vladimir and I talked about everything except his
spying activities . en, one afternoon, Vladimir announced, “I’m ready to talk
about what I did.” Only then did we ﬁnally speak in great detail about his
espionage activit ies. Vladimir spoke freely and honestly not because he was
forced to talk, but because he liked me and considered me his friend.
e interrogation techniques I used with Vladimir may, at ﬁrst glance, seem
to make little sense . . . but everything I did was carefully orchestrated to
achieve Vladimir’s eventual confession and cooperation. In e Like Switch, I
will reveal the secrets of how I won Vladimir over and how, using the same
techniques, you can get anyone to like you for the moment or for a lifetime. I
can do this because it turns out that the same social skills I developed to
befriend and recruit spies are equally eﬀective in developing successful
friendships at home, at work, or anywhere else that personal interactions take
place.
At ﬁrst, I did not see this one-to-one crossover from my ﬁeldwork to
everyday life. In fact, it was initially brought to my attention near the end of
my career with the FBI. At that time I was teaching classes to young
intelligence oﬃcers on how to recruit spies. On the ﬁrst day of a new class I
arrived a half hour early to set up the room for a group exercise. To my
surprise, two students were already there. I didn’t recognize them. ey sat
quietly in the front row with their hands folded on their desks and a look of
anticipation on their faces. Considering the time of day and the fact that most
students were not known for arriving early to class, I wondered what was going
on. I asked them who they were and why they had decided to show up at such
an early hour.
“Do you remember Tim from your previous class?” one of the students
asked.
“Yes,” I said.
“Several weeks ago the two of us went to a bar with Tim. He told us about
your lecture on inﬂuence and rapport building.”
“And . . . ?”  I still didn’t see where this was leading.
“Tim bragged that he learned in class how to pick up ladies.”
“Obviously, we were skeptical,” said the second student.
“So we put him to the test,” the ﬁrst student continued. “We picked a
random woman who was in the club and challenged Tim to get her to come to
our table and have a drink with us, without saying a word.”
“What did he do?” I inquired.
“He took us up on the challenge,” the student exclaimed. “We thought he
was nuts. But then, about forty-ﬁve minutes later, the woman came over to our
table and asked if she could join us for a drink. We still ﬁnd it hard to believe,
and we saw it happen.”
I gave the students a quizzical look. “Do you know how he did it?”
“No!” exclaimed one of them. And then, in unison, both of them said,
“at’s what we came here to learn!”
My ﬁrst reaction to their comments was to assert the professionalism
expected of me, and I told them the purpose of the classroom training was to
teach students to be eﬀective intelligence oﬃcers, not pickup artists. It was my
second reaction that took me by surprise, an epiphany of sorts. inking of
Tim’s antics, I suddenly realized that the same techniques used to recruit spies
could be employed to become a victor in the so-called dating game. Even more
important, in a broader sense, these techniques could be used whenever a
person wants to win anyone over in virtually any personal interaction. It was
that realization that served as the launchpad for this book and all the
information contained within it.
