Meanwhile I had sent several communications to the Grand Duke,
insisting that pressure be brought to bear upon his nephew and to keep
him away from London; not even permitting him under penalty of
stopping his allowance, to write the lady in the case until the Grand Duke
gave his permission. By now, London had gradually ﬁlled and the season
was at its height. I went the rounds of the theaters from Drury Lane to
the Empire and I visited the clubs. I found here men whom I had met
previously and presently I rounded up two or three fellows with whom I
had been fairly intimate at one time or another on hunting expeditions
and at continental watering places. I made them introduce me to diﬀerent
sets. Dexterous maneuvering obtained me invitations to afternoon teas
and at-homes in the same circle frequented by my lady.
I was introduced to her at an afternoon reception. She was a typical
outdoor Englishwoman. Not particularly handsome, but possessing to the
full the clearness of skin and eyes and strong virile health, that is the
hereditary lien of Albion’s daughters. Tall, willowy, and strong, of free and
independent manners and habits, she was the direct antithesis of the usual
German woman. I reasoned that this was probably the reason of the
young Duke’s infatuation.
“How do you do you wild Colonial boy. Still as fond of straw berries as
ever?”
We both burst out laughing.
“So your ladyship observed and classiﬁed my little maneuvers.”
“Of course,” she said with a toss of her head.
Unforced and pleasant chatting followed. I could more and more
understand the Grand Duke’s infatuation; in fact, considered him quite a
“deuced, lucky beggar.”
From that day on, I made it a point to be present whenever she
attended public places, such as the theater, concerts, or restaurants.
Gradually and imperceptibly by little services here and there I won her
conﬁdence. ere was an after-theater supper in the Indian room of the
Windsor, and I was invited. By this time, people had come to know
something about me. I was a globe-trotter, a man of leisure, interested as
a hobby in research work in medicine. I discovered that her aﬀair with the
young Grand Duke was a fairly open secret in her set; also, that she was
expecting him in London almost daily. Gradually I hinted that I knew the
young Grand Duke. As I gained her conﬁdence further, I invented
amorous aﬀairs for him and hinted to her about them. In this way, I
ﬁnally managed to induce her to talk. Subtly I instilled a vague
resentment against him, which was accentuated by his non-appearance in
London society up to now. His Highness having been kept away by his
Serene Uncle, the serene one having been cautioned to do so by me.
Two months passed before I was invited to the lady’s home in Mayfair
and by that time partly because I pretended to know the young Grand
Duke, I was on a more intimate footing. I had learned that she had met
him at a hunting party at the Earl of Crewes’ shooting box in Shropshire.
Later, she intimated that this was but their oﬃcial meeting and that their
acquaintance actually dated from a mountain trip she had taken to
Switzerland, the universal playground of royalty traveling incog. I learned
too that her heavy bridge gambling had cost her a lot of money.
e information that the lady was in debt did not come easily. To
obtain it, I had to work on her maid. Whenever the occasion arose, I
made it my business to tip the maid liberally. I contrived to do a number
of little things for her. Knowing the lady to be out, I called at the house
one day and while pretending to be waiting for my hostess, I put some
leading questions to the maid. I learned that her mistress was pressed for
money. at was an opening worth working on.
ereafter, I contrived to be present whenever there was a bridge party
at the lady’s. ey are pretty high gamblers, those English society women,
and I came to see that the lady was generally a heavy loser. It was my
good fortune for her to lose to me one night. Now, it is the custom at
these gatherings not to hand over cash; instead, the unlucky one pays
with what corresponds to an “on demand note.” I took her note that
night and with others—the whereabouts of which I learned from the
maid and which I indirectly purchased from the holders—I took all these
to a notorious money-lender and made a deal with him. He was to take
the notes and press the lady for payment, of course keeping my name out
of it. It is obvious that, trying, as I was to win her conﬁdence, I could not
