Caring allows us to reach the higher elevations of relationship growth, and
the letters that spell out the word also tell us what we need to do to care
eﬀectively.
C = Compassion/concern
A = Active listening
R = Reinforcement
E = Empathy
Let’s examine each of these words in turn to help deﬁne what must be done
to keep long-term relationships with signiﬁcant others healthy and happy.
COMPASSION/CONCERN
People who are caring individuals show an honest concern for others. Not a
passing comment or a ﬂippant response to someone who is hurting, but rather
a genuine sense of compassion for what that person is experiencing and a
commitment to help make things better. In long-term relationships there will
be many times when one or both partners are facing crises. It is here where the
true level of concern, or lack of it, becomes evident. It is relatively easy to
maintain a long-term relationship when things are going well; it is in the
crucible of a crisis that the true character of an individual is revealed and found
to be wonderful or wanting.
In a sense, there is little one can imagine that is more beautiful than two
people who have come to depend on each other to be there as a caring partner
when the need arises, as it most certainly will. Perhaps the most enduring form
of caring comes when one person becomes a caregiver for a sick or injured
partner. To witness this kind of selﬂess sacriﬁce, day after day, sometimes year
after year, is to see the embodiment of caring in its purest form.
Hopefully, you will never be called upon to care for a signiﬁcant other in
sickness (rather than in health). Fortunately, on a daily basis you can do little
things that let your partner know you care about them. Sharing the workload,
doing something extra special for no reason, taking the time to give a
compliment to your “special person,” oﬀering reassurance when they falter,
being there when they need you, oﬀering a kind word and a helping hand:
ese are all acts of caring that a compassionate individual undertakes. is
kind of caring is “loving someone from the inside,” and when you give it from
your heart it will be received with heartfelt gratitude.
I was sitting in a crowded Washington, D.C., shopping mall food court
having lunch and as I was walking to the trash receptacle, I thought I heard my
name being called. I scanned the crowd and didn’t notice anyone trying to get
my attention so I continued walking. I then heard my full name being called. I
turned and saw a young lady approaching. She stopped and introduced herself,
but I didn’t recognize her. She told me that she wanted to thank me for saving
her life. I gave her a quizzical look. She continued, “I was one of the girls who
was kidnapped about ten years ago.” Instantly, I ﬂashed back to the day she
and her friend were rescued by two police oﬃcers in a hail of gunﬁre. I
reminded her that the two police oﬃcers were the ones who saved her life. She
acknowledged that the oﬃcers rescued her from her kidnapper, but I was the
one who saved her life. “How so?” I asked.
“I was an emotional wreck,” she said. “Your kindness and compassion got
me started on the healing process.” I recalled being assigned to the case. My
supervisor tasked me to interview her after she was freed. It took about a
month to get her calmed down enough to tell me what happened without
breaking down. I spent about an hour each day just letting her talk things out.
Empathic statements were crucial. We rarely discussed the actual kidnapping
event but, eventually, I was able to conduct a detailed interview of the then-
fourteen-year-old victim . I completed the interview and never saw her again,
nor did I give her another thought, but she remembered. “You may have
forgotten me,” she said, “but I will always remember your acts of kindness. I
don’t think I would have recovered without your help.” I thanked her and told
her that I was just doing my job. I put my tray on the service counter and we
parted. I realized then that words spoken, which are often long forgotten by
the speaker, can continue to have a profound impact on the listener.
ACTIVE LISTENING
Active listening means you are using verbal and nonverbal cues along with
empathic statements when the other person is speaking. Some of the earlier
suggestions in Chapter 5 involving active listening take on added signiﬁcance
