responded that most schools of the same size would require several janitors to
accomplish the work he did using the system he designed (I was providing him
with an opportunity to pat himself on the back).
As we talked, it was clear that I had developed a solid rapport with the
janitor. He explained to me in great detail about how he designed his
maintenance routine and went on to share stories about the teachers and
administrative staﬀ. e tales were interesting but of no use to my
investigation. But I listened anyway, and gained a friend in the process. I gave
him my business card and asked him to call me if he learned any new
information about the graﬃti incident.
Several weeks later, the janitor called me with a rumor he had heard from
one of the students. e rumor turned out to be true and led to the
apprehension of the parties responsible for the graﬃti.
It is doubtful that the janitor would have taken the time to call me about
the rumor he heard if I had not developed a good rapport with him during our
only visit.
Strategy #3: If you want to get information from somebody without
arousing their suspicion or putting them on the defensive, use the elicitation
approach. You use elicitation devices in conversation to obtain information
from a person without that individual becoming sensitive (aware) of your
purpose.
People often hesitate to answer direct questions, especially when the
inquiries focus on sensitive topics. If you want people to like you, use
elicitation instead of questions to obtain sensitive information. Elicitation
techniques encourage people to reveal sensitive information without the need
for making inquiries.
Asking questions puts people on the defensive. Nobody likes nosy
individuals, especially when you ﬁrst meet them. Ironically, this is the time you
need the most information about persons of interest. e more information
you know about an individual, the better you will be able to develop strategies
to cultivate successful personal and business relationships.
Elicitation is the ability to obtain sensitive information from people
without them realizing they are providing you with this data. During my
career in the intelligence community, I trained agents to obtain sensitive
information from adversaries while at the same time maintaining good rapport
with them. e characteristics of elicitation:
1. Few, if any questions are asked, thus preventing a defensive reaction from the person of
interest;
2. the process is painless because your person of interest is not aware they are revealing sensitive
personal information;
3. people will like you because you are making them the focus of your undivided attention; and
4. individuals will thank you for being so kind and will likely contact you in the future, which
provides another opportunity to glean additional information from them.
Elicitation works because it is based on human needs.
The Human Need to Correct: Using Elicitation Through Presumptive Statements
People have a need to be right, but people have a stronger need to correct
others. e need to be correct and/or to correct others is almost irresistible.
Making presumptive statements is an elicitation technique that presents a fact
that can be either right or wrong. If the presumptive is correct, people will
aﬃrm the fact and often provide additional information. If the presumptive is
wrong, people will provide the correct answer, usually accompanied by a
detailed explanation as to why it is correct.
Recently I was buying a piece of jewelry, but I was hoping to not pay retail.
In order to negotiate the best price, I had to know the markup on the jewelry
in the store where I was going to make the purchase and also the clerk’s
commission, if any. For obvious reasons, this information is closely held. I
knew if I asked direct questions about prices, I would not get the answers I
needed to negotiate the best deal, so I used elicitation to get the information I
wanted.
CLERK: May I help you?
ME: Yes, I’m looking for a diamond pendant for my wife.
CLERK: We have lots of those. Let me show you what we have.
e clerk handed me a velvet case containing several pendants. I looked
intently at one of them.
ME: How much is this one?
CLERK: One hundred and ninety dollars.
ME: Woooh, the markup must be at least 150 percent. (presumptive statement)
