RULE #1: LISTEN: PAY ATTENTION WHEN PEOPLE SPEAK SO YOU ARE
FULLY AWARE OF WHAT THEY ARE SAYING.
Listening is more than simply remaining silent while your person of interest is
speaking. It involves total focus on what is being said. Because we can think at
about four times the rate the normal person talks, there is a temptation to let
our thoughts wander. Resist this temptation.
Speakers notice when a person isn’t listening. e best way to focus on the
listener’s speech and, at the same time, transmit to the speaker nonverbally that
you are paying attention to what is being said is to maintain eye contact. It is
also a friend signal that helps build stronger relational bonds. You needn’t stare
at the speaker to accomplish this; however, maintain eye contact with the
speaker about two-thirds to three-fourths of the time he or she is talking to
establish the appropriate degree of connectivity and to indicate you are tuned
into what is being said. Make a concerted eﬀort not to interrupt speakers when
they are talking. Extroverts must be particularly careful not to do this, as they
have a tendency to begin talking before the speaker is ﬁnished speaking, and,
in fact, ﬁnish what the person is saying to hurry the conversational turn-taking
process.
People like individuals who let them talk, particularly when it is about
themselves. As one unknown writer once observed, “Friends are those rare
people who ask how you are and then wait to hear the answer.” Wise counsel!
e empathic statement is the perfect tool to demonstrate that you are
listening to the other person. In order to form a good empathic statement, you
must listen to what the person is saying or take note of their emotional or
physical disposition. Paraphrasing what the person said keeps the focus on that
individual. For example, if you need help in a department store and you
observe that the salesperson looks tired, you might not get the service you
expect. To increase the probability of getting better service, you could use an
empathic statement such as: “You look like you’ve had a busy day” or “It’s been
a long day. Looks like you’re ready to go home.” ese empathic statements
demonstrate to the salesperson that you took the time to notice their personal
disposition, and more important, make them feel good about themselves.
During casual conversations, people tend not to listen to the person speaking.
Even a dull conversation can be enhanced using empathic statements. For
example, your coworker is talking excitedly about his weekend trip to the lake.
Unless you went to the lake with your coworker, the experience might not
interest you. An empathic statement such as “Sounds like you really enjoyed
your trip” will let the speaker know that you are listening and taking an
interest in what he or she is saying. Empathic statements are the spice of
conversations. If you make it a habit to use empathic statements, you will force
yourself to listen more carefully to other people. As a consequence they will
feel good about themselves and like you.
Remember, individuals enjoy talking about themselves and feel good when
people listen as they verbalize their thoughts, which brings us back to the
Golden Rule of Friendship. When you can make a person feel good about
themselves, they are going to be more favorably disposed to liking you and
accepting you as a friend.
BUILDING TRUST IN LESS THAN TEN MINUTES
is was the title of an article written by an anesthesiologist named Scott
Finkelstein. In the article, he describes what it’s like to face life-and-death
problems on a daily basis and emphasizes the importance of doctor-patient
communication in dealing with medical crises. “I give each patient my full
attention,” explains Dr. Finkelstein. “I maintain eye contact. I listen. I validate
their feelings, . . . e fear melts away. And then they trust me. All in less than
ten minutes.”
Giving a person the opportunity to talk, listening to what they say without
interruption, and giving nonverbal cues that what they say is of interest to you
can make a huge diﬀerence, whether it be in gaining a patient’s trust or a
person’s friendship.
RULE #2: OBSERVE: IN ANY VERBAL INTERACTION BE SURE TO OBSERVE
THE OTHER PARTY BEFORE, DURING, AND AFTER RECEIVING AND
TRANSMITTING INFORMATION.
