argument. e problem is that long after the argument is over and the reason it
started is forgotten, the emotional aftermath of being hurt by a person’s words
will linger.
Even though it might be tempting to use information you have learned
from previous discussions to win an argument or “get in your licks” during a
ﬁght, don’t do it if your partner considers such information “oﬀ-limits.” Resist
the temptation to lash out with your tongue! Over time, if a person persists in
deliberately tripping word mines, pushing hot-button issues, or bringing up
topics that are considered oﬀ-limits in arguments, the relationship might very
well collapse as a result.
KEEP YOUR VOICE AWAY FROM THE HOT BUTTON!
Be an eﬀective active listener. Not only will you be seen as more caring; you
will also achieve a greater understanding of your partner and strengthen your
relationship in the process. Here are a few additional hints to make your active
listening more eﬀective:
• Let your partner ﬁnish what they are saying before you begin talking.
• Important discussions deserve an appropriate setting where you can easily hear what your
partner is saying (don’t talk about ﬁnances or life-changing events in a noisy, crowded
restaurant!).
• Don’t be thinking of what you’ll be saying while your partner is talking; focus on their words,
not your thoughts.
• If your partner is introverted and ﬁnds it uncomfortable to speak, encourage them with head
nods and verbal nudges (see Chapter 5).
• Observe your partner while they speak. Communication is nonverbal as well as verbal. Also, by
paying attention to your partner they are most likely to see you as sincerely interested in what
they have to say.
• Be prepared to compliment your partner when they make a good point or suggestion.
• When you hear something you don’t like or agree with, don’t automatically dismiss the
comment or go on the oﬀensive. Give the observation some thought and see if there might be
some truth in what was said or, at least, some room for reaching a compromise that is
satisfactory to both partners.
• If your partner is clearly wrong in a given situation, try to help them ﬁnd a face-saving way to
gracefully own up to their error.
• You can even suggest a “time-out” if you feel the conversation is becoming confrontational.
REINFORCEMENT
Reinforcement is the use of reward and punishment meted out by one
individual to another in a relationship. Here are some errors you don’t want to
make in dealing with your signiﬁcant other:
1. Being Unaware at Your Style of Interaction Leads to the Inappropriate Administration of
Rewards and/or Punishments to Others on a Day-to-Day Basis.
Some people, when involved in a long-term relationship, exhibit consistent
patterns of reinforcement with their partner that are not conducive to
maximizing relationship satisfaction. ere are three kinds of individuals who
use reinforcement inappropriately.
The Negativistic Partner
eir motto: “Emphasize the negative; ignore the positive.”
eir credo: “What credit do you deserve for doing something right? at’s your job!”
eir behavioral approach to a partner: negativity and punishment.
Negativistic partners seem to have mastered the “See, I told you so” routine
when you’re wrong and the “I don’t see you” routine when you’re right. e
person living with a negativistic partner usually utters this oft-heard lament:
“e only time I hear from my partner is when I do something wrong.” Is it
any wonder such behavior creates bitterness and a sense of frustration? Nobody
likes to feel that when they do something good, it is ignored, while any
mistakes receive maximum attention. As one wife so aptly told her husband,
“At least if you’re going to criticize my mistakes, give equal time to my
successes.” Negativistic partners need to recognize that it is appropriate to
criticiz e their signiﬁcant other if they do something wrong that needs
correcting; however, it is also appropriate to praise that individual when they
do something well.
The Perfectionistic Partner
eir motto: “ere’s always room for improvement.”
eir credo: “If it isn’t perfect; it isn’t worth it.”
eir behavioral approach to a partner: sets unreasonable standards.
