SUPERVISOR (OFFICER): To talk about.
ME (DEFENSE ATTORNEY): ank you, Oﬃcer. So what you wrote is that what my client
initially said he said with certainty and the second thing my client said he did not say with
certainty.
SUPERVISOR (OFFICER): “No, that’s not what I meant. e suspect said both things with
certainty.”
ME (DEFENSE ATTORNEY): at’s not what you wrote. By your own deﬁnitions of the
words said and explain, you are saying that the ﬁrst statement was said with certainty and that
the second statement was not said with certainty. Is that correct?
SUPERVISOR (OFFICER): No, both statements were said with certainty.
ME (DEFENSE ATTORNEY): If both statements were said with certainty, then why didn’t you
use the word said in both sentences?
SUPERVISOR (OFFICER): Uhhh. I don’t know.
I won my point, but it was a Pyrrhic victory. My need to be right caused
everything to go wrong. From that point forward, the tension in the room was
obvious. I forced the participants to choose between a more eﬃcient method
of writing and their supervisor’s less eﬃcient method of writing. Of course,
they sided with their supervisor.
e unintended consequences of being right occur every day in oﬃces and
homes across the country. We unintentionally alienate our bosses, colleagues,
friends, and spouses and cause unnecessary strife and tension.
ere is a better way. You can be right without wronging someone. Instead
of asserting your right to be right, ask people for their advice. at allows them
to be part of the decision-making process. Additionally, they feel good about
themselves because you came to them to seek their advice, which elevates them
to an honored position. e Golden Rule of Friendship states that if you make
people feel good about themselves, they will like you.
Using this “ask for advice” strategy still allows you to be right, get the results
you want, and maintain (or increase) friendships with those individuals who
now have a face-saving way to maintain their dignity and avoid being seen as
“wrong.”
e following exchange between a subordinate and her boss illustrates the
technique of seeking advice. e subordinate found an error in a newly formed
controversial policy prepared by her boss. Rather than trumping her boss with
the “right” card, she sought her super visor’s advice.
SUBORDINATE: Do you have a minute, Boss?
BOSS: Sure, what’s up?
SUBORDINATE: I was reviewing your latest policy and noticed something. I’d like your advice
on the matter.
BOSS: Sure. Let me take a look.
e subordinate can now point out the discrepancies in the policy and her
supervisor has the opportunity to clarify his mistake without losing face.
Salespeople can use the same technique when they meet longtime customers
or new customers. Textbook publisher representatives regularly visit my oﬃce
pitching new books for use in my classes. Instead of personalizing their sales
approach, they tell me how their book is better than the one I am currently
using. e sales rep could be right, but there are unintended consequences of
such an approach. e salesperson is implying that my judgment in picking
textbooks is bad. is realization does not make me feel good about myself. I
would be more likely to listen to the representatives if they introduced
themselves and then said, “Professor, I would like to get your advice about this
new book designed for use in your course.”
THE FACE-SAVING TECHNIQUE THAT AVOIDED A MUG SHOT
As an FBI agent, I always dreaded the moment I would be ﬂying somewhere
on a long-awaited vacation and be called upon to deal with an unruly
passenger or handle a crisis. Well, it happened on a 6 a.m. ﬂight out of Los
Angeles. I had boarded and was sitting quietly in my seat when a ﬂight
attendant came up and said there was a drunk passenger in the back of the
plane whom the captain wanted oﬄoaded. I looked around and, sure enough,
there was a passenger staggering in the aisle while another ﬂight attendant was
yelling at him. “You get oﬀ this ﬂight . . . you’re an idiot.” So much for trying
to calm things down. e attendant standing over me said, “You’re an FBI
agent, take him oﬀ the plane.”
I thought, “I might as well use a bit of my training.” So I walked over to
where the man was leaning against his seat. I told him I was an FBI agent,
showed him my badge and credentials, and suggested we both sit down and
talk. He wasn’t so drunk that he failed to understand me. He sat down and I
edged into the empty seat next to him.
