information along with a lengthy explanation even though it borders on the
classiﬁed realm.
While you are waiting to board your plane back to the United States, your
translator informs you that your lecture was a tremendous success and the
Chinese government would like to invite you back next year to present another
lecture. Since the small lecture hall was ﬁlled to capacity, you will be speaking
in the Grand Ballroom next year. (e Chinese translator presented an
opportunity for the scientist to ﬂatter himself, which is the most powerful
form of ﬂattery. is technique of ﬂattery will be discussed later.) Oh, and by
the way, your wife is invited to accompany you, all expenses paid.
As an FBI counterintelligence oﬃcer, I was required to debrief scientists
who went overseas to determine if they were approached by foreign
intelligence oﬃcers seeking classiﬁed information. I interviewed many
scientists who described similar stories to the one above. All the scientists
reported that the Chinese were impeccable hosts and never asked about any
classiﬁed information. No foul play. Case closed.
e one thing that bothered me was the scientists’ comments that they had
so much in common with their translators. Given the cultural diﬀerences, this
piqued my curiosity. I knew that establishing “common ground” was the
quickest way to develop rapport. (is “common ground” technique to build
rapport will be discussed in Chapter 2.)
I then used the Friendship Formula to further evaluate the scientists’ visits
to China. Certainly, proximity was present. Frequency was low, for the
scientists only went to China once a year. If frequency is low then duration
must be high in order to develop a personal relationship. Duration was high.
e same translator met the scientists early every morning and spent the entire
day and evening with them. Based on the topics of the translators’ discussions
with the scientists, intensity was high. It ﬁnally dawned on me. e scientists
were being recruited but they didn’t know it and neither did I up to that point.
e scientists and, for a while, I myself, did not see the re cruitment eﬀort.
e Chinese, knowingly or unknowingly, used the Friendship Formula, which
describes the way people naturally develop friendships. Because it is a natural
process, the brain does not attend to this subtle recruitment technique. From
that time forward, I interviewed scientists using the Friendship Formula to
determine if any recruitment attempts by foreign intelligence services took
place. I speciﬁcally asked the scientist to describe the proximity, frequency,
duration, and intensity with any people they met during their trips. I also
briefed the scientists before they went to China to be aware of the subtle
techniques the Chinese use to steal our secrets.
THE FRIENDSHIP FORMULA AND YOU
roughout the rest of this book, the Friendship Formula will be used as the
foundation upon which friendships are built. Regardless of what type of
friendship you desire (short, long, relaxed, or intense) it will always be
inﬂuenced by proximity, frequency, duration, and intensity. ink of the
Friendship Formula as the concrete foundation upon which a house is built.
e home can take many diﬀerent forms, just like friendships can, but the
foundation remains basically the same.
APPLYING THE FRIENDSHIP FORMULA IN EVERYDAY LIFE
I met Phillip, the son of a close friend, at a local coﬀee shop. Phillip had
recently graduated from a small-town college and landed his ﬁrst job in Los
Angeles. He was single and wanted to make new friends. He had lived his
entire life in small towns but suddenly found himself in a big city, where
making friends seemed like a daunting task.
I advised him to routinely frequent a bar near his apartment and display
friend signals as he entered to send the message he was not a threat (friend
signals are introduced in the next chapter), and to sit alone at the bar, a table,
or a booth.
His daily visits to the bar would allow proximity to take hold, and his
constant appearances would allow for frequency and duration to be
established. With each visit, he could gradually increase intensity, the ﬁnal
component of the Friendship Formula, by looking at other customers a little
longer and smiling. Phillip needed a curiosity hook to draw people to him.
Phillip told me he was an antique marble collector. I instructed him to bring a
magnifying glass and a bag of marbles with him each time he visited the bar. I
