Chan, Grace Chock, Cynthia Cohen, Don Delitz, Alex DeSilva, Maurice
DeVaz, Jim Doyle, Julio and Carmen Enriquez, Burt, Barbara and Daniel
Friedman, Sally Fuller, Jean Golden, John Gollehon, Jan Gordon, David and
Odean Hargis, Steve Harris, Phil Hellmuth, Paulette and Kevin Herbert, Tom
Johnson, Grace Jones, Sandra Karlins, Miriam and Arnold Karlins, Robert
Kindya, Jerry Koehler, Albert Koh, Freddie Koh, Ray Kuik, Jim Levine, Len-  
McCully, Rob Mercado, Debra Miceli, Chad Michaels, Peter Miller, Joe
Navarro, Jacqueline O’Steen, Fran Regin, Maryanne Rouse, John Russell,
Wallace Russell, Harry, Jeannie, Libby and Molly Schroder, Steven Schussler,
Mike Shackleford, Stan Sludikoﬀ, Joan and Eric Steadman, Gary Walters,
Annette, Jill and Michelle Weinberg, Robert Welker, Tom Wheelen, Ken
VanVoorhis, and Anthony Vitale.
Finally, Jack and I want to extend a special thanks to Matthew Benjamin—
our editor extraordinaire—and all the other wonderful people at Simon &
Schuster who contributed mightily to making this manuscript all it could be.
MARVIN KARLINS
ABOUT THE AUTHORS
JOHN R. “JACK” SCHAFER, PH.D., is a psychologist, professor, intelligence consultant, and
former FBI Special Agent. Dr. Schafer spent ﬁfteen years conducting
counterintelligence and counterterrorism investigations, and seven years as a
behavioral analyst for the FBI’s National Security Division’s Behavioral
Analysis Program. He developed spy recruitment techniques, interviewed
terrorists, and trained agents in the art of interrogation and persuasion. Dr.
Schafer contributes online pieces for Psychology Today magazine, has authored
or coauthored six books, and has published numerous articles in professional
and popular journals. He is a professor with the School of Law Enforcement
and Criminal Justice at Western Illinois University.
MARVIN KARLINS received his Ph.D. in psychology from Princeton University and is
currently Professor of Management at the University of South Florida’s College
of Business Administration. Dr. Karlins consults internationally on issues of
interpersonal eﬀectiveness and has also authored twenty-four books, including
two national bestsellers, What Every BODY Is Saying and It’s a Jungle in ere.
He resides in Riverview, Florida, with his wife, Edyth, and daughter, Amber.
SimonandSchuster.com
authors.simonandschuster.com/John-R-Jack-Schafer
authors.simonandschuster.com/Marvin-Karlins
 Facebook.com/TouchstoneBooks
 @TouchstoneBooks
