Salespeople use the alternate response question all the time. When you go to a car dealership, a good
salesperson will not ask you if you want to buy a car. They will ask you if you like blue cars or red cars. If you
answer, “Blue cars,” the salesperson will show you blue cars. If you answer, “Red cars,” the salesperson will
show you red cars. If your answer is a color other than blue or red, then the salesperson will show you that color
of car. Good salespeople give the customers the illusion that they are in control of the car buying experience,
when in fact the salespeople are directing you through a well-choreographed presentation.
Strategy #2: Use the verbal technique of “status elevation” to make people
feel better about themselves and see you as a friend. Status elevation is a
technique that satisﬁes an individual’s need for recognition. I discovered this
approach one day when I was with my son, Bryan, at a bookstore. An author
was signing books at a booth in the front of the store. Nobody was at the
booth, so Bryan and I went over to talk with the author. While my son spoke
with the woman, I looked through her book. I noticed that her style of writing
reminded me of Jane Austen. I mentioned this to the author. Her eyes lit up
and her cheeks took on a pinkish hue. She replied, “Really? I don’t have much
time to write. I have three kids. My husband is in the military and is gone a lot
of the time. I want to go back to college to ﬁnish my degree. I left school to get
married. at was a mistake I’ll always regret.” With one comment, this
woman was telling me her life story like I was a long-lost friend.
I tried this technique several more times with the same results. Once, I met
an aspiring candidate from the Republican Party. After we talked politics for
several minutes, I remarked that his political style reminded me of Ronald
Regan. e young man puﬀed up and told me about his family upbringing,
where he went to college, and many other personal details that indicated he
saw me as someone worthy of being liked. Status elevation can take the form
of a simple compliment.
MOPPING UP A SCHOOL GRAFFITI PROBLE M
On one occasion, I interviewed a janitor at a high school regarding some racist
graﬃti that had appeared sometime during the previous night. At the outset of
the interview, I attempted to build some rapport with him. I commented that
he had a big job taking care of such a large building all by himself. He told me
about how he designed a system that allowed him to accomplish multiple tasks
at the same time by following the shortest routes through the building. I
responded that most schools of the same size would require several janitors to
accomplish the work he did using the system he designed (I was providing him
with an opportunity to pat himself on the back).
As we talked, it was clear that I had developed a solid rapport with the
janitor. He explained to me in great detail about how he designed his
maintenance routine and went on to share stories about the teachers and
administrative staﬀ. e tales were interesting but of no use to my
investigation. But I listened anyway, and gained a friend in the process. I gave
him my business card and asked him to call me if he learned any new
information about the graﬃti incident.
Several weeks later, the janitor called me with a rumor he had heard from
one of the students. e rumor turned out to be true and led to the
apprehension of the parties responsible for the graﬃti.
It is doubtful that the janitor would have taken the time to call me about
the rumor he heard if I had not developed a good rapport with him during our
only visit.
Strategy #3: If you want to get information from somebody without
arousing their suspicion or putting them on the defensive, use the elicitation
approach. You use elicitation devices in conversation to obtain information
from a person without that individual becoming sensitive (aware) of your
purpose.
People often hesitate to answer direct questions, especially when the
inquiries focus on sensitive topics. If you want people to like you, use
elicitation instead of questions to obtain sensitive information. Elicitation
techniques encourage people to reveal sensitive information without the need
for making inquiries.
Asking questions puts people on the defensive. Nobody likes nosy
individuals, especially when you ﬁrst meet them. Ironically, this is the time you
need the most information about persons of interest. e more information
you know about an individual, the better you will be able to develop strategies
to cultivate successful personal and business relationships.
Elicitation is the ability to obtain sensitive information from people
without them realizing they are providing you with this data. During my
career in the intelligence community, I trained agents to obtain sensitive
