“Who will win the Super Bowl next year?” indicates the person is evaluating
how to answer the question. You should allow others to ﬁnish their answers
before responding so as not to alert them to this technique. Be advised that if
the person you are talking to is aware of this technique, he or she will
deliberately avoid using “Well.”
Get into the habit of asking people a direct yes-or-no question and listening
for their response. Answering such a question with “Well” or not directly
answering the question is a strong indicator of deception, requiring additional
probing.
THE LAND OF IS
When people choose not to answer yes or no, they go to the Land of Is. e
Land of Is occupies the space between truth and deception. is murky area
contains a labyrinth of half-truths, excuses, and suppositions. President
Clinton’s now famous statement to the grand jury inspired the concept of the
Land of Is. To paraphrase what Clinton stated, “It depends upon what the
meaning of the word is is. If is means is, and never has been, that’s one thing, if
it means there is none, that was a completely true statement.” Clinton cleverly
took the prosecutor to the Land of Is to avoid directly answering the
prosecutor’s direct yes-or-no question.
e following exchange between a mother and daughter demonstrates the
Land of Is technique.
MOM: Your teacher called this afternoon and told me that she suspected you of cheating on an
exam. Did you cheat on your exam?
DAUGHTER: I spend two hours a night studying. I study more than anybody I know. People
who don’t study are the people who have to cheat on exams. I study all the time. Don’t accuse
me of cheating!
MOM: I’m not accusing you of cheating.
DAUGHTER: Yes, you are!
e mom asked her daughter a direct yes-or-no question. Her daughter
chose not to respond with a simple yes-or-no answer but, instead, took her
mother to the Land of Is to avoid directly answering it. e daughter ended
her response with an accusation, which put Mom on the defensive. e topic
was no longer about cheating but about Mom making unwarranted
accusations.
Mom could have prevented her daughter from going to the Land of Is by
ﬁrst recognizing that the technique was being used and then redirecting the
conversation back to the initial topic of inquiry. For example:
MOM: Your teacher called this afternoon and told me that she suspected you of cheating on an
exam. Did you cheat on your exam?
DAUGHTER: I spend two hours a night studying. I study more than anybody I know. People
who don’t study are the people who have to cheat on exams. I study all the time. Don’t accuse
me of cheating!
MOM: I know you study hard and get good grades. at’s not what I asked you. I asked you
whether or not you cheated on your exam. Did you cheat on your exam?
Redirecting the conversation back to the initial question forced her
daughter to answer the question, “Did you cheat on your exam?” Her daughter
must answer yes or no or take her mother back to the Land of Is. Failure to
answer a yes-or-no question with a yes-or-no answer is not conclusive proof of
deception, but the probability of deception does increase signiﬁcantly. If her
daughter did not cheat on her exam, answering no would not be diﬃcult. e
truth is simple. e truth is direct.  e truth is not complicated.
WHY SHOULD I BELIEVE YOU?
When someone provides you with an answer to a question, simply ask them
“Why should I believe you?” Honest people typically answer, “Because I am
telling the truth” or some derivation thereof. Truthful people simply convey
information. ey focus on accurately presenting facts. Conversely, liars try to
convince people that what is being said is true. eir focus is not on accurately
presenting facts, but rather, on convincing listeners that the facts presented
represent the truth. Since liars cannot rely on facts to establish their credibility,
they tend to bolster their credibility to make their version of the facts appear
believable.
When people answer with other than “Because I’m telling the truth” or
some derivation thereof, tell them that their response did not answer the
question and repeat the question, “Why should I believe you?” If they again do
not respond with “Because I’m telling the truth” or some derivation thereof,
