It is amazing what a kind word will do when you sense your partner is
feeling down. Using empathic statements such as “You must really be hurting”
when learning your loved one has suﬀered a setback sends a powerful message
that you were caring enough to pick up on the problem and willing to take the
time to express your concern. “Being there” for a partner who is physically or
psychologically hurting provides great comfort, and such compassion is
remembered and cherished.
Empathy is such an important part of relationships it has been recognized
and extolled for decades as a critical tool in shaping relationships of all kinds:
short term, long term, personal, and business. No less a luminary than Henry
Ford summed it up nicely when he observed: “If there is any one secret of
success it lies in the ability to get the other person’s point of view and see
things from that person’s angle as well as from your own.”
Concern/compassion, Active listening, Reinforcement, and Empathy are the
components of CARE that turn short-term friendships into long-term
relationships, and long-term relationships into all they are capable of
becoming.
HOW TO DEAL WITH ANGRY PEOPLE (INCLUDING YOURSELF):
PRACTICING ANGER MANAGEMENT
e tools you have been provided to carve out satisfying short and long-term
relationships are designed to work with almost anyone (no, psychopaths are
not included!). is doesn’t mean that any given relationship will be totally
satisfying and devoid of conﬂict. Even the best of friends and signiﬁcant others
can have disagreements, even angry disagreements, when in bad moods or on
opposite sides of an issue. Learning to deal with anger, which is inevitable in
any relationship, is an important skill you’ll want to develop for getting over
the rough spots in any interpersonal interaction.
HOW TO SUCCESSFULLY HANDLE ANGER IN PERSON-TO-PERSON
INTERACTION
Angry friends, coworkers, or family members create stress. ey can make your
work and home life most unpleasant. Developing eﬀective anger management
strategies forms the cornerstone for goodwill and a distinctly more pleasant
environment, at home and in the oﬃce.
An eﬀective anger management strategy involves keeping the focus of the
conversation on the angry party, allowing him or her to vent, and in addition
provides a directed course of action to deal with the problem that caused the
anger in the ﬁrst place. is breaks the anger cycle and allows for the resolution
of crisis situations without damaging personal relationships. People will like
you more as a result of your handling of a crisis situation because in the end
you will make the angry party feel good about themselves by reducing their
stress and, equally important, yours as well. Here are some guidelines for
handling anger in the best way possible.
Do Not Engage Angry People Because They Are Not Thinking Logically
Anger triggers the ﬁght or ﬂight response, which mentally and physically
prepares the body for survival. During the ﬁght or ﬂight response, the body
automatically responds to a threat without conscious thought. As the threat
increases, a person’s ability to reason diminishes. Angry people experience the
same phenomenon because anger is a reaction to a real or perceived threat.
Angry people talk and act without thinking. e level of their cognitive
impairment depends on the intensity of their anger. e more angry people
become, the less likely they are to logically process information. Angry
individuals are not open to solutions when they are mad, because their ability
to think logically is impaired.
e body takes about twenty minutes to return to normal after a full ﬁght
or ﬂight response. In other words, angry people need time to calm down
before they can think clearly again. Angry people will not completely
comprehend any explanations, solutions, or problem-solving options until they
can think logically again. Allowing for this refractory period is a critical part of
any anger management strategy. e ﬁrst strategy for breaking the anger cycle
is “Never try to rationally engage angry people.” Anger must be vented before
oﬀering problem solving solutions.
