Don’t let distractions interrupt your attentive listening to the speaker. You
want to send the message that what the speaker is saying is important to you.
at message will ring hollow if you answer your cell phone and put the
speaker on hold. If your cell phone rings while you are in a conversation, ﬁght
the urge to answer. For reasons unknown, most people feel compelled to
answer a ringing phone. Just because your cell is ringing doesn’t mean you are
obligated to answer it. Rarely are telephone calls urgent. If no message is left,
that is clearly the case. And if a message is left, you can listen to it, usually in a
matter of minutes, once your conversation has ﬁnished. Even in today’s tech-
savvy world, texting and answering telephone calls during a conversation is
disrespectful.
e best way to handle a ringing phone is to take it out of your pocket or
purse, send the caller to voice mail, put it back into your pocket or purse, and
return your attention to the speaker. is action sends a deliberate message to
the speaker that he or she is more important than a telephone call and they
have your undivided attention. Plus, you will make a positive impression on
them . . . m aking any relationship easier to achieve.
SEVEN TIPS TO GET HIGHER TIPS
Getting people to like you, even for a onetime encounter, can be beneﬁcial. You are more likely to have
complaints addressed properly, you are more likely to get people to assist you, even when they don’t have to go
the extra mile, and—if you’re a waiter or waitress—you can predispose people to show their appreciation for
personal service in the form of higher tips.
The key to receiving higher tips is to create an environment that pre disposes customers to like the server.
Tip 1: Lightly Touch Customers (Female Servers)
Research shows that female servers who touch customers, male or female, lightly on the shoulder, hand, or arm
receive higher tips than from customers who are not touched. Males, in particular, drank more alcohol than
customers who were not touched, creating more opportunities to tip the server. Touch when interpreted properly
produces a feeling of friendliness and, therefore, pre disposes customers to tip more generously.
A word of warning: Touching can have a negative effect if it is perceived as ﬂirtatious or dominating and
could reduce the amount of tips rather than increase them. Female servers should be careful when touching
male customers who are in the company of involved females because any touching could produce jealousy.
Tip 2: Wear Something in Your Hair (Female Servers)
Female servers who wear ornamentation in their hair such as ﬂowers, real or fake, barrettes, or other similar
objects receive higher tips from both male and female customers. One explanation for this ﬁnding is that
customers may perceive servers who wear ornaments in their hair as more attractive, which thus predisposes
customers to give higher tips. Interestingly, attractiveness has no effect on tip amounts for male servers from
either male or female customers.
Now, let’s tackle the eight-hundred-pound gorilla in the room. Yes, research shows that more attractive
female servers get higher tips than less attractive servers do, regardless of the level of service. Servers with
larger breasts get higher tips. Servers with blond hair get higher tips. Tips increase as a server’s body size
decreases. Servers who wear makeup receive higher tips from male customers but not from female customers.
That is just the way it is. Enough said.
Tip 3: Introduce Yourself by Name (Male and Female Servers)
When servers introduce themselves by name, they receive higher tips. Personal introductions make the servers
appear friendlier. Customers tip servers who appear friendly and likable. Servers who introduced themselves by
name received an average tip of two dollars more than servers who did not. Mundanely providing customers
your name is not sufﬁcient. Your introduction should be accompanied by a wide smile as it makes you appear
friendlier and more personable and thus predisposes customers to leave higher tips.
Tip 4: Create Reciprocity (Male and Female Servers)
When people receive something from somebody, they are predisposed to reciprocate. Customers who receive
something, even small items, will typically reciprocate by leaving a larger tip. Servers can induce reciprocity
through several techniques; even just writing “Thank you” on the back of the check will produce higher tips.
Reciprocity can also be induced in a more subtle fashion. Just prior to the time when the customers’ orders
are complete, tell one of the customers that the manner in which the food was prepared was not up to your
standards and that you sent the meal back to the chef to have it cooked correctly. Then apologize for the delay
and, after a few minutes, serve the food as it was originally prepared. The customers perceive that you have
done them a favor, although no favor was actually performed, thus predisposing the customers to reciprocate
by means of a higher gratuity. Caution should be used when using this technique. You should select
imperfections that do not question the taste or quality of the food or discredit the restaurant. Reciprocity can
also be induced by bringing mints along with the check.
Tip 5: Repeat the Customer’s Order (Male and Female Servers)
People like people who are like them. When you repeat orders, customers subconsciously feel that you are more
like them than not. People who are in good rapport mirror each other’s gestures and speech. By repeating the
customers’ orders, they experience sameness with you, like you more, and tend to leave bigger tips.
Tip 6: Provide Good Service (Male and Female Servers)
At the heart of a good tip is good service. Greet customers with a warm, friendly smile, introduce yourself by
name, repeat the customers’ order, reﬁll drink glasses without being asked, and periodically check in on the
customers to see if they need anything. Each customer is different and you should learn to speed-read them.
Some customers want to be pampered, some customers require minimal service, and some customers just want
to be left alone to enjoy their meal. The quicker you learn to read your customers, the higher your tips will be.
Tip 7: Apply the Golden Rule of Friendship
The Golden Rule of Friendship (see Chapter 3) applies to everyone: “Make the customers feel good about
themselves and they will like you.” The more customers like their servers, the higher the tips they are likely to
leave.
FOE SIGNALS
