THE LIKE SWITCH
How to Turn People On to You
When you hear “FBI,” you likely don’t think the Friendly Bureau of
Investigation. But my twenty years as an agent specializing in behavioral
analysis enhanced my ability to quickly read people and gave me a unique
understanding of human nature and shared human behaviors. And my work,
which ranged from convincing people to spy on their own country to
identifying perpetrators and convincing them to confess, allowed me to
develop many incredibly powerful methods for getting people to trust me,
often without me saying a word. In my role as behavioral analyst for the FBI’s
Behavioral Analysis Program, I developed strategies to recruit spies and make
friends out of sworn foes. In other words, I developed speciﬁc skills and
techniques that could turn an enemy of the United States into a friend who
was willing to become a spy for America.
My profession boiled down to getting people to like me. My work with
“Vladimir” (I have changed the names and identifying characteristics of those I
discuss and have created some composites to best illustrate what my work has
demonstrated) illustrates this point well.
Vladimir had illegally entered the United States to commit espionage. He
was caught in possession of classiﬁed defense documents. As an FBI Special
Agent, I was assigned to interview Vladimir. At our ﬁrst meeting he made a
vow not to speak to me under any circumstances. I then began the process of
countering his deﬁance by simply sitting opposite him and reading a
newspaper. But at a carefully planned time, I deliberately folded the newspaper
and left without saying a word. Day after day and week after week I sat across
from him and read the newspaper while he remained mute, handcuﬀed to a
nearby table.
Finally, he asked why I kept coming daily to see him. I folded the
newspaper, looked at him, and said, “Because I want to talk to you.” I
immediately returned the newspaper to the upright position and continued
reading, ignoring Vladimir. After a while, I got up and left without saying
another word.
On the following day, Vladimir again asked me why I came every day and
read the newspaper. I again told him that I came because I wanted to talk to
him. I sat down and opened the newspaper. A few minutes later, Vladimir said,
“I want to talk.” I put the newspaper down and said, “Vladimir, are you sure
you want to talk to me? When we ﬁrst met, you told me that you would never
speak to me.” Vladimir replied, “I want to talk to you, but not about spying.” I
agreed to this condition but added, “You will let me know when you are ready
to talk about your spying activitie s, won’t you?” Vladimir agreed.
Over the next month, Vladimir and I talked about everything except his
spying activities . en, one afternoon, Vladimir announced, “I’m ready to talk
about what I did.” Only then did we ﬁnally speak in great detail about his
espionage activit ies. Vladimir spoke freely and honestly not because he was
forced to talk, but because he liked me and considered me his friend.
e interrogation techniques I used with Vladimir may, at ﬁrst glance, seem
to make little sense . . . but everything I did was carefully orchestrated to
achieve Vladimir’s eventual confession and cooperation. In e Like Switch, I
will reveal the secrets of how I won Vladimir over and how, using the same
techniques, you can get anyone to like you for the moment or for a lifetime. I
can do this because it turns out that the same social skills I developed to
befriend and recruit spies are equally eﬀective in developing successful
friendships at home, at work, or anywhere else that personal interactions take
place.
At ﬁrst, I did not see this one-to-one crossover from my ﬁeldwork to
everyday life. In fact, it was initially brought to my attention near the end of
my career with the FBI. At that time I was teaching classes to young
intelligence oﬃcers on how to recruit spies. On the ﬁrst day of a new class I
arrived a half hour early to set up the room for a group exercise. To my
surprise, two students were already there. I didn’t recognize them. ey sat
quietly in the front row with their hands folded on their desks and a look of
