that I must have 15,000 pounds ($75,000) . In four days I had the money.
e rest of the transaction was commonplace. She handed over all the
letters and documents and I gave her the 15,000 pounds. I know today
that her ladyship travels extensively in a very comfortable manner on the
yearly appanage allowed her by the old Grand Duke. I do not know
whether she still goes to Carlton Terrace to eat strawberries, but I ﬂatter
myself that her present good fortune is partially due to the fact that she
once went there.
HOW DR. GRAVES ACCOMPLISHED HIS MISSION
It is truly remarkable, when reading Dr. Graves’s diary, to realize this man was
a full century ahead of his time in using behavioral analysis and psychological
techniques to achieve his objective. If you take the time to reread the portion
of Chapter 1 detailing how the Friendship Formula was used to entice
“Seagull” to betray his country and become a spy for the United States, you
will be amazed at the parallels between the strategies employed by the FBI and
Dr. Graves in their work. Consider them:
1. In both cases, recruiting their targets was a well-choreographed plan that was executed over an
extended period of time. Both agents used the techniques presented in this book to predispose
their targets to like them prior to their ﬁrst meetings.
2. Dr. Graves, like the FBI agent Charles, used the Friendship Formula to establish a relationship
with the English lady. First they established proximity with their targets followed by an increase
in frequency and duration, and gradually introduced intensity, curiosity hooks, and
increasingly more intense nonverbal cues.
3. In both cases, the principle of proximity was used to establish nonthreatening contact between
the agent and the target (Chapter 1). In Seagull’s case, the FBI agent took pains to place
himself in public places where Seagull walked and would be aware of his presence. In Dr.
Graves’s case, he did the same by establishing proximity with his target on the riding trails and
seating himself at a table close to the one where his target routinely sat in the restaurant.
4. In both cases, the principles of frequency and duration were also utilized. With Seagull that
involved the FBI agent positioning himself on Seagull’s shopping route in a manner that
increased the number of instances (frequency), where the foreign diplomat saw him and
adding duration by following Seagull into the grocery store, extending the contact time
between the two men. With the English Lady, Dr. Graves increased frequency by the number
of times he passed the woman on the riding trails and saw her in the restaurant. Dr. Graves
even pointed out the power of frequency when he wrote, “I employed the theory of the
subconscious attraction of an oft seen though unknown face.” To achieve duration, he
extended contact time by being around the woman at additional public places, like the theater
and concerts. e more time (duration) you spend with people, the more you are able to
inﬂuence their decision-making process and thought patterns.
5. In both cases intensity was achieved through the use of nonverbal cues and a “curiosity hook.”
e constant presence of a stranger being around Seagull and the English lady aroused their
curiosity. In the case of Dr. Graves, the “Strawberry Stunt” served as a curiosity hook. What
type of man eats ﬁve servings of strawberries in one sitting and gives the waitstaﬀ such a large a
tip? Who was this person? What did he want? is curiosity motivated both Seagull and the
English lady to make an eﬀort to discover who Charles (the FBI agent) and Graves (the
German spy) were and what they wanted. Dr. Graves noted, “If you glance at her under
favorable conditions such as my strawberry ‘stunt’ had created for me [increased intensity], she
will return the glance. You both half smile and do not look at each other again that afternoon.”
When Dr. Graves ﬁrst met the lady, she displayed a “hair ﬂip” (the toss of her head), which is a
friend signal indicating that Dr. Graves established some degree of rapport before their ﬁrst
words were spoken. Both Charles and Graves had conﬁdence in the psychological principles
they employed and allowed time for them to work. ey did not rush the development of the
relationship. Instead, they let the relationships develop naturally over time, as “normal”
relationships would.
6. In both cases, Dr. Graves and the Special Agent used friend signals to present themselves as
nonthreatening (see Chapter 1), thus preventing their targets from going shields up when the
ﬁrst meetings took place. e Special Agent did not approach Seagull until he was comfortable
with the agent’s presence. Dr. Graves sat alone in the restaurant and showed no desire to meet
anyone, giving the illusion that he was not a threat. Dr. Graves also ensured that he was
noticed by walking in after the lady and her friends were already seated.
7. In both cases, information was gathered about their targets from various sources. In the Seagull
case, the agent received information from FBI analysts. In the case of Dr. Graves, he read local
newspapers, society pages, spoke with reporters, and later the groomsmen at the stables to
obtain information about his target. In both cases, vital information was gathered
surreptitiously to discover the things that motivate the targets to act as they do, to assess their
personalities, and to learn about the things that could be used to establish common ground.
Dr. Graves used elicitation techniques (see Chapter 6) to obtain sensitive information about his
target without alerting the elicitation sources to the fact that they were providing sensitive
information.
8. Dr. Graves went to the Carlton Terrace not only to be close to his target but also to establish
common ground by eating strawberries every day like his target did.
9. Dr. Graves took advantage of the psychological principle of misattribution (see Chapter 4) to
predispose the lady to like him. Horseback riding, like other exercises, triggers an endorphin
release, which makes people feel good about themselves. If there is no apparent reason for that
good feeling, people tend to attribute their good feeling to the people nearest to them.
According the Golden Rule of Friendship, if you want people to like you, make them feel good
about themselves. Dr. Graves was fostering rapport before he even said a word to his target.
10. In the end, Dr. Graves made it appear that it was the lady’s idea to exchange the letters for her
accrued debt, not Dr. Graves’s idea. In Seagull’s case, he watered and fertilized the seed of
treason planted by the FBI agent. is is the true sign of a successful operation.
e two spy stories, separated by a century, remind us that human nature is
a constant and that friends can be made if you are willing to use the tools
presented in this book to ﬂip the Like Switch and turn people on to you.
