eﬀect of physical beauty is reduced in Internet communications, unless a
picture accompanies an Internet proﬁle. Keep in mind that people often lie in
their Internet proﬁles to enhance their ability to attract partners. Since people
do not have face-to-face interaction with the person writing to them, they have
no point of reference against which to judge their written communication.
Contrast plays an important role in attraction. When two people stand side
by side, people tend to contrast one against the other. In the absence of a
second person for comparison purposes, an individual will tend to compare the
single person against their “idealized” person. Since the person writing to you
on the Internet is singular, you will have a tendency to compare that person
against your idealized person. Over time, people tend to attribute the
characteristic of their idealized person to the person writing them. is
misattribution leads to the increased probability of being the victim of a
catphish.
RAPPORT BUILDING
Building rapport on the Internet relies solely on written text, assuming no use
of Skype or other photographic transmission. is limits the techniques people
normally have available to establish rapport in face-to-face communications.
As mentioned earlier in the book, ﬁnding common ground is a powerful
technique to establish rapport. In order to ﬁnd common ground on the
Internet, you must disclose personal information to the person to whom you
are writing. Disclosing this kind of information is another powerful technique
to develop rapport. Since Internet communications are anonymous, people
tend to disclose more information, and do it more quickly, than they would
face-to-face. One reason for this is that the sender does not have verbal and
nonverbal cues to gain feedback about the acceptance or rejection of his or her
information by the receiver of the written information.
When people receive rejection cues in face-to-face communications, they
tend to stop disclosing. is is not the case online. In fact, people tend to
increase the disclosure of sensitive personal information. e result of an
increase in self-disclosure propels the relationship to a higher level than if the
relationship were a face-to-face encounter. As a result, a vital step in the
relationship developing process is skipped. During this vital step in face-to-face
communication, prospective partners have the opportunity to slowly disclose
information using verbal and nonverbal cues to pace the development of the
relationship and the rate of information release. If things go awry during this
initial step, the two people can go their separate ways without having disclosed
too much sensitive information to create personal vulnerabilities. Because of
the absence of this vital step in written Internet communication, where no
face-to-face interaction occurs, the chances for catphishing increase.
Recruiting people to spy for the United States follows a similar relationship
pathway. Spies need to be groomed. e steps required to develop close
friendships or romantic relationships are the same ones required to convince a
person to become a spy. In several cases, I tried to rush the relationship due to
operational demands. ese recruitments always failed because I skipped the
initial step in relationship development. e ﬁrst step is critical. Revealing too
much information too soon will dampen the relationship. e recruitment
target will disengage. As mentioned earlier, a partner is seen as too “fast” or too
“slow” if the expectation milestones for relationship development are hurried
or lagging. Internet relationships often violate relationship expectations
because partners are propelled to a higher level of relationship intensity before
they are psychologically prepared to do so. is creates vulnerabilities for both
partners to the interaction.
EMOTIONAL INVESTMENT
e longer the Internet relationship continues, the more likely people are to
remain in the relationship because of their deep emotional investment. is
doesn’t mean they are actually a good couple, but because they’ve spent too
much time in the interaction, they don’t feel they can just quit, and besides,
the relationship has developed to a point where the volume of sensitive
information released creates personal vulnerabilities so signiﬁcant that giving
up is not an option.
AN EXAMPLE OF HOW EMOTIONAL INVESTMENT WORKS IN THE REAL WORLD
