acknowledging his expertise makes him feel good about himself. is brings
the Golden Rule of Friendship into play. “If you make other people feel good
about themselves, they will like you.”
People who like you are probably going to be more open to your
suggestions. e use of the words “our company” signals that Stacey has
emotional equity in the organization and is a team player. Her statement
“make our company more proﬁtable” is very appealing, especially if the
manager receives credit for an increased bottom line. When the manager gives
his advice, he takes partial ownership of the idea or proposed project. When
individuals feel as though they are part owners of a good idea or project, they
enthusiastically advance it.
THE GLORY ENCHILADA
e downside for Stacey in using the statement with her boss that we
recommend is that she must share the “glory enchilada” with him. At ﬁrst
glance, this might not seem fair or palatable since Stacey came up with the idea
and feels she should (rightfully) get all the credit. e problem is people
seldom take into account the beneﬁt of sharing the glory: goodwill. Glory has
a short expiration date; goodwill has a long shelf life. A good idea produces a
large plate that can be divided into many pieces. Freely distributing the pieces
increases likability, puts people in your debt, and gives you allies should you
need their help in gaining successes down the road.
THE CAT, THE RAT, AND THE METRONOME
Listening to what another person is saying can be diﬃcult to achieve,
particularly for extroverts. ey are so busy thinking about what they want to
say, interrupting the speaker, or letting their mind wander that they literally
don’t hear what is being said. Obviously, a person can’t respond eﬀectively to
another individual’s message if he or she doesn’t receive and process it. Is it
really possible that we can “block” out a person’s speech and not hear it? Yes.
is was demonstrated in an experiment conducted more than a half century
ago.
Psychologists conduct some pretty strange and morally suspect experiments
with animals. In this particular investigation, electrodes were implanted in the
auditory area of a cat’s brain. en they didn’t feed the cat for a few days so it
was good and hungry. Once the cat was wired and ravenous, it was placed in a
room with a metronome, an instrument that makes a clicking sound on a
regular basis. Also in the room was an oscilloscope, the kind that translates
sounds into blips on a screen, similar to the way heartbeats are represented by
spikes on a moving piece of paper.
What happened? Every time the metronome made a clicking sound, it was
picked up by the electrode implanted in the cat and simultaneously a blip
appeared on the oscilloscope screen. Translation: e cat heard the clicking
sound. Not really a very dramatic experiment, you might be thinking; hardly
worth depriving a cat of food and making it undergo an operation.
But there’s more, and here is where the experiment gets interesting. A
mouse was introduced into the room. e cat immediately turned its attention
to the potential meal, watching the rodent’s every move with intense interest.
And here’s the shocker: the oscilloscope screen went ﬂat! e metronome was
still clicking, the sound was still entering the cat’s ear, but somehow the animal
was able to block the sound at the brain level. e cat, basically, was no longer
hearing the tick, tick, tick of the metronome. It was so focused on the mouse
that it was able to block out the sounds it was “hearing.”
As it was with the cat so, too, is it with humans. We are able to block out
what a person is saying. e upshot of all this: Just because a person is
speaking to someone does not guarantee that the listener is hearing what is
being said.
e way to be sure you hear what someone is saying is to pay attention to
their verbal pronouncements. is is referred to as active listening and is
something you’ll want to practice if you want to use verbal behavior as a tool
to build new friendships.
When it comes to establishing and building friendships through verbal
behavior, take your cue from LOVE (Listen, Observe, Vocalize, and
Empathize). is acronym captures the four rules you’ll want to follow if you
want to maximize your chances for making friends through the use of
communication.
