and the agent walked over to me. He asked if I had my boarding pass. I
nodded and showed it to him. He took it and handed me a diﬀerent pass.
“Enjoy your ﬂight, Herr Schafer,” he said.
I looked at the document and recognized I had been upgraded to a seat in
business class. I said, “ank you, sir, I really appreciate that.”
“No problem, don’t worry about it,” he replied and waved me toward the
plane.
•  •  •
Another time my plane was late and people were really angry. I was waiting in
line at the boarding counter and the guy in front of me was so worked up he
was yelling at the agent about how he was going to miss his connecting ﬂight
and yada, yada, yada. She told him there was nothing she could do but put
him on the later ﬂight that left at 5:30 p .m.
en it was my turn. I walked up to the obviously ﬂustered employee and
didn’t expect anything; I was only trying to make the agent’s day better. She
took the ticket I handed her and said, “Sorry, sir, you’re going to miss your
connecting ﬂight. I can book you on a later plane leaving at ﬁve thirty p.m.”
I looked her directly in the eyes and said wryly, “I don’t think that’s
acceptable,” mimicking the previous passenger. And as she looked back at me I
added, “Can I yell at you now?” And she said no and mentioned the 5:30 p.m.
ﬂight again.
I repeated, “Can I yell at you now?” at’s when she started giggling. I said,
“When can I start yelling at you?” Both of us were now grinning and bantering
back and forth. After about a minute of this she said, “You know what . . . I
just found a seat on the two forty p.m. ﬂight,” and typed my name into the
computer. I commented, “I’m just curious, I overheard you tell the previous
customer that there were no seats available on the two forty p.m. ﬂight.”
“ere are no seats for people who yell at me. Do you want to yell at me now?”
she said. “No, ma’am,” I sheepishly replied. “ank you.”
e interesting thing is I didn’t walk up to the agent with the idea of getting
an earlier ﬂight; I just wanted to make her feel better. But when you make
other people feel good, good things often end up happening to you.
•  •  •
I’ve used this “get out your frustration” approach many times with all kinds of
customer service representatives and it never fails to assuage their anger and
put them in a better mood. During one of my foreign trips, a group of Chinese
passengers missed their connecting ﬂight to Hong Kong and they were giving
the gate agent a hard time. She was trying to be nice to them, to no avail.
Eventually, the police were called to deal with the situation because the
passengers were causing such a ruckus.
I had the dubious “honor” of being the next person in line to speak with
the ticket agent. So I walked up to the podium and said, “Looks like you had a
little trouble here today.” (empathic statement)
Her answer was short and curt, “Yeah.”
“Looks like you’re frustrated,” I observed. (empathic statement)
“Yeah, I’m very frustrated that I can’t yell at those people. I can’t get rid of
my frustration.”
I gave the agent a sympathetic nod of the head. “Ma’am, I’ll tell you what I
can do. I’m going to go back to the rope at the beginning of the line and then
I’m going to walk up to you again and say something about your service and I
want you to let me have it. G et it out of your system.”
e woman looked a bit leery but said, “Okay.”
So I went back to the roped area, turned around, and walked back up to the
counter. I pointed my ﬁnger at the agent and said, “I didn’t like the way you
treated those people. You were rude, inconsiderate and . . .” I got no further, as
the agent told me to shut up and then she let me have it. I mean, all that pent-
up frustration was boiling just below the surface and now she had a chance to
get it out!
After she ﬁnished her tirade, I told the woman I was extremely angry and
disappointed.
e agent caught her breath and asked, “What would assuage your anger,
sir? Would an upgrade help?”
I nodded aﬃrmatively. “Yes, I think that would help.”
“All right, I’ll give you an upgrade to ﬁrst class,” she declared.
I said, “ank you.” And then we both started laughing.
As my ﬂight was boarding the agent actually came on the plane and
thanked me for “making her day.”
