Whenever you interact with another person, communication takes place on
two levels: verbal and nonverbal. Before, during, and after verbal interaction it
is important that you observe the other individual’s nonverbal signals and body
language, as they can serve as a barometer to assess if a conversation is
appropriate, how an ongoing conversation is progressing, what impact the
conversation had when ﬁnished, and, also, as a warning should something be
said that a party to the verbal exchange ﬁnds objectionable. Backward leaning,
crossing the arms over the chest, and lip compressions are good nonverbal
indicators that the conversation is not being well received. People tend to
distance themselves from things they don’t want to see or hear. is is the
opposite of the leaning-forward nonverbal cue discussed earlier. Crossing the
arms over the chest is a blocking gesture, which could indicate the person
wants to symbolically and physically block what they are seeing or hearing.
Other signs of disengagement are looking around the room, when the person
looks at their watch as if to say, “Time’s up,” or turning their feet, torso, or
both toward the door or other parts of the room. When you see the other
person beginning to disengage from the conversation, change the subject. You
are probably spending too much time talking about yourself and not focusing
on the other person.
It is important to observe nonverbal behavior even before any attempt at
conversation is made. Of course, the importance of observation doesn’t stop
there. Should a person’s nonverbals signal that beginning a conversation is
appropriate, then let the talking commence. Just don’t take that as the reason
for ending your observation! Continual observation during an ongoing verbal
interaction is critica l for spotting any potential problems that might otherwise
go unnoticed.
is is particularly true when it co mes to “word mines.”
Words mean diﬀerent things to diﬀerent people. When these words are
used they can, like land mines, blow apart a developing relationship. When a
party to the conversation is oﬀended by one of these word mines, he or she
doesn’t normally say anything about their discomfort but simply begins the
process of distancing and/or exiting the relationship. However, their nonverbal
behavior often provides a clear indication that something troubling was said.
ey might wince, get a shocked or surprised look on their face, or take a step
backward. A person who is processing information on the verbal and
nonverbal levels will pick up these signals and can often save the day by asking
if they said something oﬀensive and, if so, assuring the listener that it certainly
wasn’t their intention to do so. A further examination of what the oﬀending
word means to both parties can usually put any bad feelings to rest and the
conversation can restart on a positive note. e hazard of word mines is that
people don’t know what emotional meanings others attach to otherwise
innocuous words.
IS IT SOMETHING I SAID?
A friend was lecturing about interviewing techniques to a group of seminar
participants. At one point he said, “People need to listen more than they talk.
e proof of this is the Lord gave you two ears and one mouth, so you should
listen twice as much as you speak.”
During the lunch break, the conference host walked into the banquet room
and informed my friend that a charge had been ﬁled against him by the Equal
Employment Opportunity Commission. She had come to investigate exactly
what happened. My friend was dumbfounded. He had no idea who would ﬁle
such a complaint and why they would do it.
It turned out that one of the attendees had a son who was born with only
one ear, and when my friend made the remark about “two ears and one
mouth,” this father thought my friend was making fun of his child.
Once my friend was told of the circumstances surrounding the complaint,
he explained to the host that his comment was a truism that had been around
for decades and when he said it, he in no way meant it as a slight against
anyone.
e host wasn’t moved. “If the father is oﬀended,” she said, “it’s his
perspective of what happened we need to address, whether you think it is
oﬀensive or not.”
My friend thought the entire situation was ludicrous. He didn’t see that he
had done anything wrong and certainly didn’t want to apologize to the father
for what he saw as perfectly acceptable language.
