requires additional skills when communicating on the Internet. People are
poor judges of their Internet partners because the cues they rely on in face-to-
face exchanges are missing. e most reliable method people have to assess
others is no longer available to them. ey must rely on unpracticed
techniques that have not yet been tested for reliability. e brain has not built
up enough data to discriminate between friend and foe signals embedded in
Internet communications. Building Internet detection skills takes time. Here
are some of the potential problems you might encounter in determining the
veracity and value of a potential online relationship.
TRUTH BIAS
People tend to believe others. is phenomenon, referred to as the truth bias,
allows society and commerce to run smoothly and eﬃciently. Absent the truth
bias, people would spend an inordinate amount of time checking data
collected from others. e truth bias also serves as a social default.
Relationships with friends and business colleagues would become strained if
their veracity were constantly questioned. Consequently, people typically
believe others until evidence to the contrary surfaces.
e truth bias provides liars with an advantage because people want to
believe what they hear, see, or read. e truth bias diminishes when people
become aware of the possibility of deception. e truth bias predisposes people
to believe what others write in emails and texts. Absent verbal and nonverbal
cues, the veracity of written communications is not as easily called into
question.
Another characteristic of the truth bias is that when people do see a few
loose ends or minor contradictions in a person’s story, they tend to excuse the
discrepancy because to do otherwise would call the person’s words or behaviors
into question. It’s easier to excuse away minor diﬀerences than to confront the
person. e best defense against the truth bias online is judicious skepticism
and use of the “competing hypotheses” technique (see the following page).
THE PRIMACY EFFECT
Truth bias creates the primacy eﬀect. e primacy eﬀect, as you will recall from
Chapter 3, creates a ﬁlter through which we view communication and events.
e primacy eﬀect does not change reality but alters people’s perception of it.
Truth bias creates a primacy ﬁlter. Anything a person writes tends to be
evaluated as truthful unless there is something to cause you to doubt what is
written. Absent verbal and nonverbal cues, individuals are at a disadvantage
when judging written correspondence on the Internet.
COMPETING HYPOTHESES
Developing competing hypotheses prevents the truth bias and the primacy
eﬀect from unduly undermining your ability to judge the character and
veracity of the person who is writing to you. Hypotheses are nothing more
than educated guesses. A competing hypothesis is an educated guess that
supposes a diﬀerent outcome based on the same or similar set of circumstances.
For example, say one hypothesis posits that the person who is writing to
you is genuine and telling the truth. A competing hypothesis posits that the
person who is writing to you is an imposter and a liar. During the course of
your written exchanges with another person on the Internet (for example, in
an instant message session) you should seek evidence to support your initial
hypothesis (the writer is genuine and truthful) or your competing hypothesis
(the writer is an imposter and a liar).
Rarely does all the evidence support the initial hypothesis or the competing
hypothesis, because honest people often say and do things that make them
look dishonest and, conversely, dishonest people often say and do things that
make them look honest. In the end, however, the weight of the evidence
should support one hypothesis over the other. Countering the eﬀects of truth
bias and the primacy eﬀect reduces your vulnerability to being deceived on the
Internet . . .  catphished, so to say.
LAWS OF ATTRACTION
As discussed in Chapter 4, attractive people receive preferential treatment and
garner more attention than do unattractive (or less attractive) individuals. e
