doesn’t seem to matter. e fear is there: fear of embarrassment, fear of
rejection, fear of causing hurt feelings, fear of making a bad impression, even
the fear of being used or taken advantage of. e good news is that
relationships don’t have to be an invitation to disaster. If you are struggling
with friendship issues or just want to improve the friendships you already have,
take heart. You are not alone and your situation is not hopeless. is book is
designed to allay your concerns about interacting with others at work, at
home, with strangers, or with loved ones.
e techniques presented in this book provide you with the best possible
chance, based on the latest scientiﬁc evidence, to get people to like you,
without saying a word. Eventually, though, you have to speak to people. Words
translate the initial feelings of goodwill into friendships and, in some cases,
lifelong relationships. is book presents the nonverbal cues along with the
verbal prompts that can get anyone to like you instantly.
Rewarding personal relationships are within your reach. It’s not a matter of
guesswork or luck. It is the result of using proven scientiﬁc knowledge and
techniques in dealing with other individuals. e opportunity to make friends
is three steps away:
1. You must be willing to learn and master the techniques presented in this book. e techniques are
similar to the power tools used by construction workers. e key is to let the tools do the work.
When I was young, I routinely used a handsaw to cut wood. One day my father let me use his
newly purchased circular saw. I took the power saw in hand and began to cut a piece of wood.
I applied the same pressure to the power saw that I would have applied to a hand saw. My
father tapped me on the shoulder and told me to ease up on the pressure and let the saw do the
work. e techniques in this book are based on similarly sound principles. Simply apply the
techniques and relax, be yourself, and let the techniques do the work. You will be amazed at
the results.
2. You must actually use this new knowledge in dealing with people in your everyday life. Knowing the
best way to do something is great, but only when you actually utilize what you have learned.
Always remember that knowledge without action is knowledge wasted.
3. You need to constantly practice what you have learned. Friendship skills are like skills in general.
e more you use them, the more proﬁcient you become; the less you use them, the quicker
you lose them. If you are willing to take these three steps, you will ﬁnd that making friends
becomes as automatic as breathing.
e Like Switch is within your reach. To ﬂip it on, just utilize the
information you’ll be learning in the following pages and watch your LQ
(Likability Quotient) soar.
1
THE FRIENDSHIP FORMULA
I’ve learned that people will forget what you said, people will forget what you did, but people will
never forget how you made them feel.
—MAYA ANGELOU
OPERATION SEAGULL
His code name was Seagull.
He was a highly placed foreign diplomat.
He could be a valuable asset if he became a spy for the United States.
e problem was, how do you convince somebody to pledge their
allegiance to an opposing country? e answer was to befriend Seagull and
make him an oﬀer too tempting to refuse. e key to this strategy involved
patience, painstaking intelligence gathering about every facet of Seagull’s life,
and a way to foster a relationship with an American counterpart he could trust.
A background investigation of Seagull revealed that he had been passed over
for promotion several times and was overheard telling his wife that he liked
living in America and would consider retiring there if that were possible.
Seagull was also concerned his country’s small pension would be insuﬃcient to
provide him with a comfortable retirement. Armed with this knowledge,
security analysts believed Seagull’s allegiance to his country could be
compromised if he was oﬀered the proper ﬁnancial incentives.
e challenge became how to get close enough to Seagull to make him a
ﬁnancial deal without “spooking” him. e FBI operative, Charles, was told to
slowly and systematically grow a relationship with Seagull, like aging a ﬁne
wine to bring out its best ﬂavor, to a point where the time was ripe to approach
him with an oﬀer. e agent was told if he moved too fast it was likely that
