is their choice. e third response is a curt reply and silence. In this instance,
the applicable empathic statement could be something to the eﬀect of
“Something’s bothering you and you don’t want to talk about it right now.
When you feel the time is right, let me know and we can talk.”
Showing empathy toward another person, whether it is done through
empathic statements or other forms of verbal commentary, is a powerful way
to make another person feel better about themselves and make them your
friend at the same time. In your friendship toolbox, the empathy tool will be
one of your most often used and eﬀective techniques for shaping successful
relationships. What you say and how you listen will go a long way in
establishing or destroying friendships.
AVOIDING CONVERSATION PITFALLS
Getting people to like you, as we have seen, can be facilitated by encouraging
them to talk about themselves while you listen to what they say and using that
information to choose and use your various friendship tools to cement the
relationship. For this reason, the last thing you want to do is discourage (usually
unintentionally) the two-way ﬂow of communication between yourself and the
person who you hope will perceive you as a friend. To keep the
communication ﬂowing smoothly, be sure to steer clear of common
conversation pitfalls that impede verbal exchanges between individuals.
1. Avoid talking about topics that engender negative feelings in your listener. Negative feelings
make people feel bad about themselves and, consequently, they will like you less.
2. Don’t constantly complain about your problems, your family’s problems, or the problems of
the world. People have enough problems of their own without hearing about yours . . . or
anyone else’s for that matter.
3. Avoid talking excessively about yourself. Talking about yourself too much bores other people.
Keep the focus on the other person in your conversation.
4. Do not engage in meaningless chatter; it turns people (and the Like Switch) oﬀ.
5. Avoid expressing too little or too much emotion. Extreme displays of emotion may put you in
a bad light.
PUTTING IT ALL TOGETHER
Verbal behavior is a vital component in activating the Like Switch and keeping
it lit. What you say, how you listen, and how you respond to what you hear
plays a huge role in determining how successful you will be in making friends
and learning information without appearing intrusive. Using the tools in this
chapter will help you achieve success in speaking the language of friendship.
You have my word on that!
