e perfectionistic partner demands high levels of eﬀort to achieve
perfection when competency will suﬃce with far less eﬀort expended.
Perfectionistic individuals aren’t unwilling to praise their partners for a task or
chore well done, as long as it is done perfectly. And therein lies the problem.
Because the perfectionistic partner sets standards so high, hardly anybody can
reach the level of performance necessary to trigger a kind word. us the
perfectionistic partner does the negativistic partner one better, requiring such
high levels of performance it is literally impossible to satisfy them in the ﬁrst
place! e most successful way perfectionistic partners can modify their over-
the-top demands in a relationship is to temper their standards to a reasonable
level, one that values competency and doesn’t demand behavioral performance
that is largely beyond reach. Perfectionistic partners should come to
understand that the amount of time and eﬀort needed to turn competent
performance into perfect performance is seldom worth it.
The Sadistic Partner
eir motto: “One mistake wipes out all good performance.”
eir credo: “To err is human; to pay for it, divine.”
eir behavioral approach: a total imbalance between the rewarding of good performance versus
the punishment of errors or mistakes.
Sadistic partners earn their title because they remind us of naughty children
who pick the wings oﬀ butterﬂies. On the surface, they seem kind enough.
ey give praise and recognition to their partners on a regular basis. But, wait!
ese individuals have a unique, and unrealistic, way of balancing their
compliments and criticis m when it comes to dealing with their partners. Here’s
how they operate: eir partners can accumulate as many compliments as their
behaviors warrant, but if they do something wrong along the way, that one
mistake “wipes out” all or most of the praise earned along the way. To the
sadistic partner who wants to change for the better, you must recognize a level
of “equity” between the weighing of good versus not-so-good behavior on the
part of your signiﬁcant other, and a recognition that accumulated incidents of
positive behavior should not be rendered worthless because of one negative
incident.
2. Not Paying Enough “Positive Attention” to Your Partner.
One of the unfortunate realities of long-term relationships is the natural
tendency for partners to lose some of the passion that drove them to shower
each other with attention, compliments, and “little acts of aﬀection” during
the early stages of their interaction. is is unfortunate, because human beings
never outgrow the need for positive attention. e sense that someone close to
them appreciates them and is willing to show it by performing small acts of
kindness and oﬀering compliments on a regular basis is critical to the health
and robustness of long-term relationships.
Here are some ways you can give your partner that special feeling of being
appreciated:
• Praise your partner when they do something well. It could be a problem they solved at work.
Possibly, it could involve some civic or social honor they achieved. It might even be nothing
more than they took the time to get you your special dessert at the bakery on the way home.
Let your partner know you appreciate them by praising them. e praise should never be
oﬀered to “get something” from the person being praised. It should be given only when it is
deserved and you can give it honestly. e good news is praise doesn’t cost money. All it takes is
a willingness to observe your partner so you can spot the praiseworthy behavior when it occurs
and then the eﬀort required to actually voice your positive attention.
• Don’t forget a partner’s signiﬁcant milestones such as birthdays, anniversaries, special events,
and so forth. It is remarkable what a store-bought card with a personal message included can
do to make a partner feel really good about themselves and, based on the Golden Rule of
Friendship, feel good about you as well.
• Encourage your partner to participate in decision making, particularly major decisions that
aﬀect both of you. at means including your partner in ﬁnancial planning, large purchase
decisions, occupational changes or moves, and health issues. People are more willing to go
along with whatever decision is reached in a matter if they feel they have had some say in what
is decided. is is because they feel included and have “ownership” of the idea. Not only will
they be more likely to concur and go along with a decision when they have been consulted, but
also they will do so in a more motivated, enthusiastic  manner.
• When appropriate, give “public recognition” to your partner by letting others know what
special accomplishment he or she has achieved. Although your partner might “act”
embarrassed or downplay what they have accomplished when you point this out to others
when they are present, this shouldn’t deter you in most cases. Even introverts will be amenable
to public recognition as long as it is done tastefully and not in too ﬂamboyant a style.
3. Not Rewarding Your Partner Correctly Because What You ink ey Want and What ey
Actually Want Do Not Coincide
Remember back to a holiday or birthday when, as a child, you received a
gift you really didn’t want. It was even worse if the gift came from the one
