to become a double agent. I knew if I simply walked into the photo shop
where he worked and said, “I’m Jack Schafer with the FBI, can we talk?” the
guy would have probably panicked and bolted from the store. So I decided to
use a curiosity hook to try to reel him in.
First, I went into his store when I knew he wasn’t there and left him a note
saying, “Sorry I missed you,” and signed it, “Jack Schafer.” I did this on three
separate occasions. On the third visit, I added my phone number to the note I
left behind. All these messages were designed to pique the North Korean’s
curiosity. Who is this Jack Schafer and why does he want to contact me? is
was what I wanted the North Korean to be wondering, hoping that each new
note would further arouse his curiosity. It worked. After receiving the note
with my phone number, he called me and I was able to arrange a meeting with
him later in the week.
THE LAW OF RECIPROCITY
Social norms dictate that if someone gives you something or performs a favor
for you, large or small, then you are predisposed to return the gesture in like
kind or in greater measure. Organizations take advantage of this law by
mailing people return address labels, calendars, or other small trinkets along
with a request for a donation. People are more likely to comply because they
received something ﬁrst and feel obligated to reciprocate in kind.
e Law of Reciprocity is a very eﬀective tool for making friends. When
you smile at someone, that person feels obligated to return the smile. A smile
signals acceptance and liking. People like to be liked. e principle of
reciprocity is triggered when people become aware that someone else likes
them. Once a person discovers that another person likes them, they ﬁnd that
person more attractive. People tend to reciprocate the same feelings others
extend to them. Reciprocity produces the most dramatic results when both
parties to the inter action form good ﬁrst impressions of or have natural feelings
toward the other person.
Not “You’re Welcome,” But . . .
e next time someone thanks you for something, don’t say, “You’re welcome.”
Instead, say, “I know you’d do the same thing for me.” is response invokes
reciprocity. e other person is now predisposed to help you when you ask
them for a favor.
THE LAW OF SELF-DISCLOSURE
Reciprocity is also linked with openness in communication. Individuals who
disclose more personal information with other people are more likely to receive
a similar level of personal information in return. is phenomenon is further
enhanced if the people who are communicating have shared interests.
Self-disclosure promotes attraction. People feel a sense of closeness to others
who reveal their vulnerabilities, innermost thoughts, and facts about
themselves. e sense of closeness increases if the disclosures are emotional
rather than factual. is is partly due to the intensity of such disclosures,
which positively aﬀects the likability of the person making them.
Disclosures that are too general reduce the sense of openness, thus reducing
the feeling of closeness and likability. Disclosures that are too intimate often
highlight character and personality ﬂaws of the person, thus decreasing
likability. People who make intimate disclosures too early in a relationship are
often perceived as insecure, which further decreases likability. us, if you are
meeting someone who you would like to have as a long-term friend or
signiﬁcant other, you should be careful about making your most intimate
disclosures in the early stages of the relationship.
Self-disclosure is a two-step process. First, a person has to make a self-
disclosure that is neither too general nor too intimate. Second, the self-
disclosure must be received with empathy, caring, and respect. A negative
response made to a genuine self-disclosure can instantly terminate a
relationship.
Self-disclosures are often reciprocal. When one person makes self-
disclosures, the listener is more likely to reciprocate by making similar ones.
e exchange of personal information creates a sense of intimacy in
relationships. A relationship in which one person makes personal self-
