Closed conversation
The members of this group are standing with their feet askew, which sends the message that they are willing to
admit a new person to their group.
Your job is to identify groups that are open to new members and make your
approach. Purposefully walk toward the group and display friend signals either
before or during the approach. Recall that our brains are constantly scanning
the environment for friend or foe cues. If you exhibit foe signals, the people in
the group you are approaching are going to defend themselves against a
possible threat and be hostile to your intrusion. If these same individuals see
you exhibiting eyebrow ﬂashes, head tilts, and a smile, they are going to
interpret these friend signals as positive and are more likely to welcome you
into their gathering.
When you reach the group you have chosen, conﬁdently step into the
empty space. Conﬁdent people are more liked than people who are not self-
assured. Even if you don’t feel conﬁdent, fake it as best you can. A ﬁne line
exists between self-conﬁdence and arrogance. Don’t cross it!
When you enter the once-empty space, listen to the conversation thread
and wait for a pause before saying anything. While you are listening, you
should slightly nod your head. Nodding signals approval and interest in what
the other individuals are saying and also sends the message that you are
conﬁdent, not arrogant. Arrogant people are typically not good listeners. e
group may be willing to accept new members, but no one likes a newcomer
who rudely interrupts an ongoing conversation. When a natural pause in the
conversation occurs, this is your cue to introduce yourself or add to the
conversation you have been listening to.
Try to ﬁnd common ground with the other members of the group. Finding
common ground (similar interests, backgrounds, jobs, etc.) is the quickest way
to develop rapport and kick your friend-making process into high gear.
Techniques to quickly build rapport will be discussed in detail in a later
chapter. If you are at a trade show or conference, you have instant common
ground because everybody at that event shares common interests or else they
wouldn’t be there in the ﬁrst place.
If common ground cannot be readily established, default to the topic of
music. Almost everyone likes music. Even if people do not like the same music,
the similarities and diﬀerences between music genres can foster lively and
usually noncontroversial conversations. You don’t want to discuss topics that
have the potential to create strong feelings and potential conﬂicts, as these can
prove divisive and are antithetical to nurturing budding friendships.
When you see these people later in the event, call them by their names. It
will mean a lot to them. How much? In the words of Dale Carnegie:
“Remember that a person’s name is to that person the sweetest and most
important sound in any language.” People like to be remembered.
Remembering a person’s name assigns them value and recognition and shows
that you care. ings remembered are things cherished.
