All examples of safe touching. At the beginning of a relationship, touching should be limited to touching between
the elbow and shoulder and hand to hand.
TOUCH: A FRIENDSHIP SIGNAL . . . BUT PROCE ED WITH CAUTION
Touching is a powerful, subtle, and complex form of nonverbal
communication. In social situations, the language of touch can be used to
convey a surprising variety of messages. Diﬀerent touches can be used to
express agreement, aﬀection, aﬃliation, or attraction, to oﬀer support,
emphasize a point, call for attention or participation, guide and direct, greet,
congratulate, establish or reinforce power relations, and negotiate levels of
intimacy.
For our purposes, touch is important in making friends, as studies have
concluded that even the most ﬂeeting touch can have a dramatic inﬂuence on
our perceptions and relationships. Experiments have shown that even a light,
brief touch on the arm during a brief social encounter between strangers has
both immediate and lasting positive eﬀects. Polite requests for help or
directions, for example, produce more positive results when accompanied by a
light touch on the arm.
But proceed cautiously: Even the most innocuous of touches can produce a
negative reaction in the person being touched. ese negative reactions include
pulling the arm away, increasing distance, frowning, turning away, or other
expressions of displeasure or anxiety. Negative reactions indicate that the
person will be unlikely to see you as a potential friend.
Unless the individual is exceptionally shy and reserved, negative reactions to
a simple arm touch probably indicate dislike or distrust. With the exception of
a traditional handshake, touching another person’s hand is more personal than
touching his or her arm. Hand touching serves as a barometer for romantic
relationships. Movies often focus on hand touching to signal that a
relationship is cold, growing, or in full bloom. If you touch a person’s hand
and they pull away, even slightly, the person being touched is not yet ready to
intensify the relationship. Pulling away does not necessarily signal rejection. It
means that you will have to build more rapport with your person of interest
before advancing the relationship. Touch acceptance signals that the person is
ready for hand holding, a more intense form of touching. Interlocking of the
ﬁngers during hand holding is the most intimate form of hand holding. A risk-
free way to measure the strength of a new relationship is to “accidentally”
touch or brush against the hand of your person of interest. Most people will
tolerate an accidental touch, even if they don’t like the person touching them,
but they will unconsciously send nonverbal signals indicating the acceptance or
rejection of the touch. Watch for these nonverbal displays and proceed
accordingly.
ISOPRAXISM (MIRRORING THE BEHAVIOR OF ANOTHER PERSON)
Isopraxism is the fancy term for “mirroring,” a nonverbal practice that can be
used to make friendship development easier and more eﬀective. Mirroring
creates a favorable impression in the mind of the person you are mirroring.
When you ﬁrst meet someone and want to gain their friendship, make a
conscious eﬀort to mirror their body language. If they stand with their arms
crossed, you stand with your arms crossed. If they sit with their legs crossed,
you sit with your legs crossed. In some situations, mirroring is impractical. A
woman who is wearing a short dress or skirt cannot be expected to assume an
open leg cross to mirror the person she is talking with. In this instance, cross
matching will suﬃce. Instead of an open leg cross, a woman could assume a
closed leg cross at the ankles or knees.
