Preening gestures such as picking lint oﬀ a partner’s clothes or straightening his
tie or coat are also signs of good rapport. Self-preening, on the other hand,
particularly when it is done to avoid looking at the other person or carried on
over an extended period of time, is often a foe signal indicating lack of interest
in the relationship.
Researchers identiﬁed a list of grooming behaviors that can be used to assess
the intensity of romantic relationships. e more grooming behaviors that are
present, the more intense the relationship. is checklist is a good way to assess
your romantic relationships. Holly Nelson and Glen Geher developed the
following partial list of positive grooming activities.
1. Do you run your ﬁngers through your signiﬁcant other’s hair?
2. Do you wash your signiﬁcant other’s hair or body while  showering/bathing?
3. Do you shave your signiﬁcant other’s legs/face?
4. Do you wipe away your signiﬁcant other’s tears when he or she cries?
5. Do you brush or play with your signiﬁcant other’s hair?
6. Do you wipe away or dry liquid spills oﬀ your signiﬁcant other?
7. Do you clean and/or trim your signiﬁcant other’s ﬁngernails or toenails?
8. Do you brush dirt, leaves, lint, bugs, etc. oﬀ your signiﬁcant other?
9. Do you scratch your signiﬁcant other’s back or other body parts?
10. Do you wipe food and/or crumbs oﬀ your signiﬁcant other’s face or body?
Getting “groomed” is a sign of good rapport.
ISOPRAXISM (MIRRORING THE BEHAVIOR OF ANOTHER PERSON)
We discussed isopraxism/mirroring to build rapport in Chapter 2. So, how do
you test for it? By checking for its presence over time through what is referred
to as the “lead and follow” approach.
Examples of good rapport (top photo, mirroring clearly visible) and poor rapport (bottom photo, asynchronous
posture and no mirroring in evidence).
People who are psychologically connected mirror one another’s body
gestures. Intentionally mirroring another individual’s body language promotes
rapport. When you ﬁrst meet someone, you’ll want to mirror his or her
gestures to establish rapport. At some point during the conversation, you can
