empathic statements using the basic formula, you can construct more
sophisticated empathic statements by dropping the “So you . . .”
BEN AND VICKI’S EMPATHIC STATEMENT ADVENTURE
Let’s look at how a conversation might work using the techniques discussed
thus far. Using the standard friend signals, Ben sends a nonverbal invitation to
Vicki, who is standing near the bar with several friends. Vicki nonverbally
accepts Ben’s invitation. As Ben approaches Vicki, he notes that she is smiling
and laughing with her friends.
BEN: Hi, my name is Ben? What’s yours?
VICKI: Hi, my name is Vicki.
BEN: So you look like you are really having fun tonight. (basic empathic statement)
VICKI: I sure am. I really needed a night out.
Once you have mastered constructing empathic statements using the basic
formula, you can construct more sophisticated empathic statements by
dropping the “So you . . .” Let’s revisit Ben’s conversation with Vicki using
sophisticated empathic statements instead of the basic formula.
BEN: Hi, my name is Ben. What’s yours?
VICKI: Hi, my name is Vicki.
BEN: You look like you’re really having fun tonight. (sophisticated empathic statement)
VICKI: I sure am. I really need a night out.
BEN: en you’ve been really busy lately. (sophisticated empathic statement)
VICKI: Yeah, I worked sixty hours a week for the last three weeks getting a project done.
With either approach, Ben recognized that Vicki was smiling and laughing,
two physical signs that she was enjoying herself. Ben constructed an empathic
statement that reﬂected her emotional status. Ben achieved several things.
First, he communicated to Vicki that he took an interest in her feelings.
Second, he focused the conversation on her. ird, Vicki’s response lets Ben
know in which direction to steer the conversation. Her response, “I sure am. I
really need a night out,” indicates that Vicki experienced some type of stress
during the week or in the recent past. Ben does not know what that stress was,
but he can construct another empathic statement to explore the reasons for her
stress in a noninvasive way. By doing so, he continues to keep the focus of the
conversation on Vicki and lets her know that he is still interested in her and
her emotional feelings. Vicki will not recognize that Ben is using a series of
empathic statements because this kind of behavior is perceived by the brain as
“normal behavior” and doesn’t arouse suspicion or a defensive reaction.
Further, Vicki subconsciously thinks she should be the center of attention (we
all do!) and she is delighted that Ben is giving her his undivided attention. is
makes her feel good about herself and increases the probability that she will
like Ben, according to the Golden Rule of Friendship.
USING EMPATHIC STATEMENTS TO KEEP CONV ERSATIONS GOING
Empathic statements also serve as eﬀective conversation ﬁllers. e awkward
silence that comes when the other person stops talking and you cannot think
of anything to say is devastating. When you are struggling for something to
say, fall back on the empathic statement. All you have to remember is the last
thing the person said and construct an empathic statement based on that
information. e speaker will carry the conversation, giving you time to think
of something meaningful to say. It is far better to use a series of empathic
statements when you have nothing to say than to say something inappropriate.
Remember: e person you are talking to will not realize that you are using
empathic statements because they will be processed as “normal” by the
listener’s brain and will go unnoticed.
FLATTERY/COMPLIMENTS
A ﬁne line separates ﬂattery from compliments. e word ﬂattery has a more
negative connotation than the term compliment. Flattery is often associated
with insincere compliments used to exploit and manipulate others for selﬁsh
reasons. e purpose of compliments is to praise others and acknowledge their
accomplishments. As relationships grow and develop, compliments play an
ever-increasing role in the bonding of two individuals. Compliments signal
that the other person is still interested in you and what you do well.
One of the pitfalls of using compliments in ﬂedgling relationships is that
you do not know the person well enough to be sincere. Insincere compliments
and ﬂattery are one and the same and will give the person receiving the false
