coveted outside corner table near to the one reserved for the lady and her
party. I always made it a point to withhold my entrance until the lady was
in the terrace; then I would stroll in alone, take a seat alone, and show a
desire to be alone. ey have a very clever way of serving strawberries at
the Carlton. A vine growing from ten to twelve large luscious berries is
brought on in a silver pot. It is the acme of luxury. You pick the fresh
berries from the vine on your table, the Terrace supplies quantities of
cream, and you pay half a sovereign—$2.50—f or a dish of strawberries.
One dish is enough for the average customer. Every afternoon I ordered
ﬁve.
Day after day, I consumed in strawberries two sovereigns and a half—
$12.50—of the Grand Duke of Mecklenburg-Schwerein’s money. Always
tipping the girl a half sovereign which made my daily strawberry bill
come up to three sovereigns ($15). For about ten days, I did this always at
the same time; always being careful to make my entrance after the lady’s
party was seated, always ordering the same number of portions, always
giving the girl the same tip. It wasn’t long before I began to be observed. I
soon saw that not only the attendants but also the patrons of the Terrace
were becoming interested in my foible. One day as I passed, I heard
someone say, “Here comes the strawberry ﬁend.”
I was satisﬁed. I knew it would be easy now to eﬀect an entrance to
the lady’s set. I had been marked as something out of the usual in the
restaurant that from three to four in the afternoon at that time of the year
is the most fashionable in London. Now, a woman like my lady does not
ﬂirt. If you glance at her under favorable conditions such as my
strawberry “stunt” had created for me she will return the glance. You both
half smile and do not look at each other again that afternoon. at is not
ﬂirting. Splitting hairs, we shall call it psychic interest.
I continued my strawberry festival and one day a manager of Carlton
Terrace told me that people were making inquiries about me. Several men
had wanted to know who I was. Under questioning, he told me that one
of the men was a member of the lady’s set. It was easy to put together two
and two. Obviously, the inquiry had been inspired by her.
Meanwhile I had sent several communications to the Grand Duke,
insisting that pressure be brought to bear upon his nephew and to keep
him away from London; not even permitting him under penalty of
stopping his allowance, to write the lady in the case until the Grand Duke
gave his permission. By now, London had gradually ﬁlled and the season
was at its height. I went the rounds of the theaters from Drury Lane to
the Empire and I visited the clubs. I found here men whom I had met
previously and presently I rounded up two or three fellows with whom I
had been fairly intimate at one time or another on hunting expeditions
and at continental watering places. I made them introduce me to diﬀerent
sets. Dexterous maneuvering obtained me invitations to afternoon teas
and at-homes in the same circle frequented by my lady.
I was introduced to her at an afternoon reception. She was a typical
outdoor Englishwoman. Not particularly handsome, but possessing to the
full the clearness of skin and eyes and strong virile health, that is the
hereditary lien of Albion’s daughters. Tall, willowy, and strong, of free and
independent manners and habits, she was the direct antithesis of the usual
German woman. I reasoned that this was probably the reason of the
young Duke’s infatuation.
“How do you do you wild Colonial boy. Still as fond of straw berries as
ever?”
We both burst out laughing.
“So your ladyship observed and classiﬁed my little maneuvers.”
“Of course,” she said with a toss of her head.
Unforced and pleasant chatting followed. I could more and more
understand the Grand Duke’s infatuation; in fact, considered him quite a
“deuced, lucky beggar.”
From that day on, I made it a point to be present whenever she
attended public places, such as the theater, concerts, or restaurants.
Gradually and imperceptibly by little services here and there I won her
conﬁdence. ere was an after-theater supper in the Indian room of the
Windsor, and I was invited. By this time, people had come to know
something about me. I was a globe-trotter, a man of leisure, interested as
a hobby in research work in medicine. I discovered that her aﬀair with the
