concerted eﬀort to send out more “friend” than “foe” signals she will have little
trouble connecting with other students.
An urban scowl.
Would you want to approach the person who is pictured wearing an urban
scowl? Keep in mind that many people who exhibit this expression are totally
unaware they are displaying foe signals that discourage others from interacting
with them. at is why an understanding of what constitutes appropriate
verbal and nonverbal friend signals is so critical.
WHEN TO SEND FOE SIGNALS
Street people are constantly seeking handouts, especially in big cities. ey can
be persistent. eir persistence is not random, though. ey target people who
are most likely to give them money, and aggressively pursue them. How do
they know who is a soft touch and who is not? Easy: ey look for friend and
foe signals. If their targets make eye contact, the odds go up. If their targets
smile, the odds go up. If their targets show pity, the odds go up.
If you are constantly being targeted by beggars and panhandlers, it is most
likely because you are unwittingly sending them nonverbal signals that invite
personal contact. Without personal contact, the chances of receiving money
are nonexistent. Beggars know this and pursue targets who are more likely to
give them a return on their eﬀorts. So, in this case, an urban scowl could come
in quite handy.
Once, as a teenager, I was walking in a neighborhood I was unfamiliar with,
which turned out to be quite dangerous. I was very much a ﬁsh out of water.
An older man who recognized that I was out of my comfort zone came to my
rescue. He oﬀered me some unsolicited but extremely helpful advice in order
to get me safely out of the neighborhood: “Walk like you have somewhere to
go. Swing your arms and take purposeful steps. And if anyone talks to you, talk
like you’ve got something to say. If you can do that, you won’t be seen as a
potential victim  and [will] be less likely to be victimized.” It was good advice
then, and it is good advice now.
Your nonverbal (how you behave) and verbal (what you say)
communications send signals to those around you. Moving with purpose has a
purpose. To a potential predator, you are less likely to be seen as prey, just as a
healthy, speedy, alert antelope is not likely to be the target of ﬁrst choice for a
lion who is chasing a herd of the beasts across the African savanna.
Cullen Hightower has been credited with this very insightful observation:
“Strangers are what friends are made of.” Every time you encounter another
person for the ﬁrst time, that individual starts out as a stranger and, at the
moment of contact, occupies the exact middle position on the friend-foe
continuum. If you use the nonverbal and verbal signals discussed in this book,
you can turn strangers into friends.
THE HUMAN BASELINE
Picture yourself driving home from work when all of a sudden you notice that
another car is right on your tail. Your brain, which is constantly taking in
information from your ﬁve senses and scanning the data for possible danger,
has detected a threat. Another automobile has done something abnormal. It
has intruded into the bubble of space that separates “safe distance” from
