kind of caring is “loving someone from the inside,” and when you give it from
your heart it will be received with heartfelt gratitude.
I was sitting in a crowded Washington, D.C., shopping mall food court
having lunch and as I was walking to the trash receptacle, I thought I heard my
name being called. I scanned the crowd and didn’t notice anyone trying to get
my attention so I continued walking. I then heard my full name being called. I
turned and saw a young lady approaching. She stopped and introduced herself,
but I didn’t recognize her. She told me that she wanted to thank me for saving
her life. I gave her a quizzical look. She continued, “I was one of the girls who
was kidnapped about ten years ago.” Instantly, I ﬂashed back to the day she
and her friend were rescued by two police oﬃcers in a hail of gunﬁre. I
reminded her that the two police oﬃcers were the ones who saved her life. She
acknowledged that the oﬃcers rescued her from her kidnapper, but I was the
one who saved her life. “How so?” I asked.
“I was an emotional wreck,” she said. “Your kindness and compassion got
me started on the healing process.” I recalled being assigned to the case. My
supervisor tasked me to interview her after she was freed. It took about a
month to get her calmed down enough to tell me what happened without
breaking down. I spent about an hour each day just letting her talk things out.
Empathic statements were crucial. We rarely discussed the actual kidnapping
event but, eventually, I was able to conduct a detailed interview of the then-
fourteen-year-old victim . I completed the interview and never saw her again,
nor did I give her another thought, but she remembered. “You may have
forgotten me,” she said, “but I will always remember your acts of kindness. I
don’t think I would have recovered without your help.” I thanked her and told
her that I was just doing my job. I put my tray on the service counter and we
parted. I realized then that words spoken, which are often long forgotten by
the speaker, can continue to have a profound impact on the listener.
ACTIVE LISTENING
Active listening means you are using verbal and nonverbal cues along with
empathic statements when the other person is speaking. Some of the earlier
suggestions in Chapter 5 involving active listening take on added signiﬁcance
in long-term relationships, where years of inter active communication with the
same individual can give us a better understanding of how to strengthen or
weaken personal bonds.
In long-term relationships, communication is a key element in sustaining or
draining the feelings we have toward one another. Open, honest interchanges
between long-term partners build trust, demonstrate a caring attitude, and
provide vital information about the on going health of the relationship.
If, from the start of any relationship, you have been a proponent and
practitio ner of active listening, you will have a great advantage the longer the
relationship lasts. is is because you will have a far better understanding of
your partner’s particular needs, personal “quirks,” interests, personality, desires,
fears, and which conversational topics are to be explored or avoided.
Without active listening, it is possible for some couples who have been
together for decades to have literally no idea how their partner really feels or
what they want. is is because they haven’t paid attention to what their
partner was saying! As hard as it might be to believe this could happen, it does;
sadly, more often than most people would care to admit. Active listening
allows open, two-way communication, where the give-and-take of information
is facilitated by active speaking and listening.
One of the greatest beneﬁts of active listening in a long-term relationship is
the ability to make ﬁner discriminations concerning how to best care for your
partner. Whereas in a new or early-stage relationship the chance of saying “the
wrong thing” is a distinct possibility, these conversational errors should drop
oﬀ dramatically (even disappear altogether) as the relationship matures and the
parties to the interaction get to know each other better through active
listening.
Any individual who has actively listened to his or her long-term signiﬁcant
other knows full well what word mines to avoid and the hot-button issues that
shouldn’t be pressed. A caring person uses this information to strengthen the
relationship. On the other hand, this knowledge can be used to weaken and
even destroy relationships. is occurs most frequently during ﬁghts when one
party to the argument purposely “pushes” the other person’s hot button,
eﬀectively escalating the conﬂict and inﬂicting mental pain at the same time.
is is a very bad strategy to employ, even if a person is mad or it helps win an
