If you are constantly being targeted by beggars and panhandlers, it is most
likely because you are unwittingly sending them nonverbal signals that invite
personal contact. Without personal contact, the chances of receiving money
are nonexistent. Beggars know this and pursue targets who are more likely to
give them a return on their eﬀorts. So, in this case, an urban scowl could come
in quite handy.
Once, as a teenager, I was walking in a neighborhood I was unfamiliar with,
which turned out to be quite dangerous. I was very much a ﬁsh out of water.
An older man who recognized that I was out of my comfort zone came to my
rescue. He oﬀered me some unsolicited but extremely helpful advice in order
to get me safely out of the neighborhood: “Walk like you have somewhere to
go. Swing your arms and take purposeful steps. And if anyone talks to you, talk
like you’ve got something to say. If you can do that, you won’t be seen as a
potential victim  and [will] be less likely to be victimized.” It was good advice
then, and it is good advice now.
Your nonverbal (how you behave) and verbal (what you say)
communications send signals to those around you. Moving with purpose has a
purpose. To a potential predator, you are less likely to be seen as prey, just as a
healthy, speedy, alert antelope is not likely to be the target of ﬁrst choice for a
lion who is chasing a herd of the beasts across the African savanna.
Cullen Hightower has been credited with this very insightful observation:
“Strangers are what friends are made of.” Every time you encounter another
person for the ﬁrst time, that individual starts out as a stranger and, at the
moment of contact, occupies the exact middle position on the friend-foe
continuum. If you use the nonverbal and verbal signals discussed in this book,
you can turn strangers into friends.
THE HUMAN BASELINE
Picture yourself driving home from work when all of a sudden you notice that
another car is right on your tail. Your brain, which is constantly taking in
information from your ﬁve senses and scanning the data for possible danger,
has detected a threat. Another automobile has done something abnormal. It
has intruded into the bubble of space that separates “safe distance” from
“unsafe distance” and it now poses a risk to your well-being. Here is what’s
interesting: You have been “automatically” monitoring the traﬃc behind you,
not even aware you are doing it so long as other vehicles do not penetrate your
bubble of protection. It is only when a trailing vehicle violates the boundaries
of normal following distance that you take notice.
What is true with your driving is also true with making friends. Your brain
is automatically monitoring verbal and nonverbal communication. When the
inputs are assessed as normal and nonthreatening, you respond to them
automatically; they don’t arouse suspicion or a sense of danger. is is the
reason the techniques you’ll learn in this book work; they all fall within the
human baseline. Even though you might think a person would “pick up” on
what you are doing, they won’t because the brain perceives these behaviors as
normal and, like the cars following at a safe distance, they don’t arouse
attention.
roughout this book, we will emphasize friend and foe signals. ey all
fall within the human baseline and can be used to enhance your relationships.
Each of you has the capacity to use these signals; in fact, we all have used them
during our lives. Unfortunately, many people don’t know all of the signals
available to use, and/or how to use them most eﬀectively. is is even truer
today than in the past, due to technological advances that have stiﬂed the
development of our “emotional intelligence.”
MAKING FRIENDS IN A THUMB-TALKING WORLD
I once invited two students to the front of the room at the beginning of a
lecture and had them sit face-to-face in chairs. I asked them to talk to each
other for ﬁve minutes. ey looked puzzled and asked what they should talk
about. I told them to talk about anything they wanted to. ey couldn’t come
up with a single subject! ey just sat there and stared at each other. I then
instructed them to turn their chairs back to back, and text each other about
anything. Amazingly, they had no problem conversing with each other via text
for the ﬁve minutes.
And therein lies a problem. In the days before cell phones and video games,
kids would learn basic social skills during face-to-face interactions on the
