2
GETTING NOTICED BEFORE A WORD IS
SPOKEN
You never get a second chance to make a good ﬁrst impression.
—WILL ROGERS
Perhaps you were fortunate enough as a child to spend a lazy summer evening
watching nature’s light show. Maybe you even grabbed a Mason jar from the
kitchen and tried to capture the pinpoints of luminescence that appeared and
disappeared in the gathering darkness, moving like tiny lanterns adrift on a
gentle breeze.
Fireﬂies are one of earth’s most fascinating creatures. For our purposes, how
ﬁreﬂies light up isn’t really that relevant; you’d need to be half biologist and
half physicist to understand the process. What is interesting is why they light
up.
It turns out ﬁreﬂies light up for a number of reasons. Some scientists believe
their ﬂashing is a warning to potential predators that they taste bitter and
would make a lousy meal. How the predators would leap to that conclusion
(leap is a good word, since frogs seem to devour them in serious numbers) is
not explained. Others point to the fact that diﬀerent species of ﬁreﬂies have
diﬀerent ﬂash patterns that help them identify members of their own species
and also determine the sex of the ﬂasher. e reason that is of interest here
involves the ﬁreﬂy’s use of light as a mating signal. Here “ﬂashing” takes on a
whole new meaning. It has been determined that male ﬁreﬂies have speciﬁc
ﬂash patterns that are used to attract their female counterparts. In case you
need a conversation starter, it might interest you that Marc Brown observed
that “higher male ﬂash rates, as well as increased ﬂash intensity, have been
shown to be more attractive to females in two diﬀerent ﬁreﬂy species.”
FIREFLIES AND FRIENDS
e behavior of the ﬁreﬂy is a great metaphor for how to be more attractive to
other people and predispose them to see us as potential friends. Because people
often see you before they hear you, the nonverbal signals you send them can
inﬂuence their opinion. is is particularly true when you are meeting a
person for the ﬁrst time and that individual has no prior knowledge of you.
Like the ﬁreﬂy, you can transmit “friend” or “foe” signals to individuals around
you in an attempt to encourage or discourage interaction. Or you can “turn
your light oﬀ” and remain relatively anonymous.
Remember that in any setting where two or more strangers are in line-of-
sight proximity to each other, there is the chance that one person will observe
the other. What he or she sees will be automatically processed by the observer’s
brain for potential “friend” or “foe” signals. In most cases, that’s as far as it goes
because the person’s visual appearance is “neutral,” and the brain, assessing the
person as neither a threat nor an opportunity, chooses to dismiss it entirely.
ink of it like a person trying to hail a cab in New York City. As dozens of
cabs move along the street the individual’s attention is on the dome light atop
the taxi. If the light is oﬀ, it is quickly ignored, but if the light is on, the
person’s attention and actions are directed to that speciﬁc vehicle.
I am sure that at some point you have been a part of a group of guys or a
group of girls who have gone to a nightclub, bar, or some other public
gathering place to try to meet members of the opposite sex. Ever notice how
some people seem to attract attention while others are hardly noticed?
Sometimes it is because of diﬀerences in physical attractiveness or outward
manifestations of wealth, but, just as often, if not more often, it is because the
“popular” person is sending out “friend” signals that gets them moved from the
“neutral” (stranger) point on the friend-foe continuum toward the positive
(friend) point on the continuum, increasing the chances of social interaction.
Remember, our brains are continually scanning the environment for friend
or foe signals. People who give oﬀ foe signals are perceived as a threat to be
