a woman you’d like to meet speaking with another man, you can test the
strength of their relationship by observing the actions of the man as you
approach. If the man extends his arm and hovers over the small of the woman’s
back, he is staking his claim, but he has not yet earned the right to invade the
woman’s personal space. is gesture means that you still have a chance to gain
her aﬀection without interfering with an ongoing, committed relationship.
If a man attempts to prematurely touch the small of a woman’s back, she
will often ﬂinch and show nonverbal signs of discomfort, or a combination
thereof. On the other hand, if, as you approach, the man ﬁrmly touches the
small of the woman’s lower back or hip region, you should assume that the
relationship has progressed well beyond the introductory stage and you should
look elsewhere for companionship.
An intimate touch.
Staking a claim, but not a sexual touch.
THE SPY WHO WAS TAKEN ABACK
Touching the small of the back provided a critical clue in an espionage case
against an FBI agent who, it turned out, provided classiﬁed information to a
foreign government for over twenty years. is agent recruited a source from a
country hostile to the United States. Over the period of their relationship, the
source convinced the agent to provide classiﬁed information that was
eventually passed on to the hostile foreign government.
e members of the Behavioral Analysis Program obtained a series of
videotapes depicting the agent interacting with his source. On one of the tapes,
he was observed touching his source on the small of her back. Based on this
gesture, the BAP team was able to determine that on or before that date the
FBI agent had engaged in sex with his source. A possible motive was detected
for the agent to knowingly provide classiﬁed information to a hostile
government. is led to an investigation that uncovered his complicity in the
illegal transmission of classiﬁed documents to a foreign government.
PREENING (“GROOMING”) BEHAVIORS
