Lip touching demonstrates that the person is feeling uneasy or uncomfortable.
is self-touching signal can be eﬀectively used in business and social
settings. For example, if you are in a one-to-one sales meeting presenting a new
product and you see your client lightly rubbing his lips with his ﬁngers, take
note. Upon seeing this nonverbal cue, you should formulate an empathic
statement such as “is may be a bit overwhelming because you have never
used this product before” to allow the client to express any concerns or
misgivings they might have about the product or service you are oﬀering. Once
you have identiﬁed your client’s speciﬁc concerns you can adapt your sales
presentation to more eﬀectively sell your product or service.
In social settings, you can avoid embarrassing moments by observing the
person you are talking to. If you introduce a sensitive topic and you see the
other person pursing or compressing their lips, you are best advised to change
the subject before more damage is done. You can safely return to the subject
when suﬃcient rapport has been built between you and the other person.
RULE #3: VOCALIZE: THE WAY YOU VOCALIZE AND WHAT YOU VOCALIZE
WILL IMPACT YOUR EFFECTIVENESS IN MAKING AND KEEPING FRIENDS
How you say something can sometimes be as important as the message itself.
Of particular concern is your tone of voice, which transmits information to the
listener irrespective of what is being said. Attraction and interest, for example,
are communicated much more by the tone of voice than by the words being
spoken.
HOW YOU SPEAK INFLUENCES HOW OTHERS PERCEIVE YOUR
MESSAGE . . . AND YOU
Tone of voice can convey messages that words alone can’t. A deep, low-pitched
voice conveys romantic interest. A high-pitched voice conveys surprise or
skepticism. A loud voice will give the impression that you are overbearing. e
tone of voice you use can embrace others or dismiss them out of hand.
e speed of your voice also regulates conversations. Fast talking adds a
sense of urgency to the conversation or can act as a prompt to end a boring
exchange. Dragging out a word can signal interest. Actors in movies often drag
out the greeting “Hello” to signal romantic interest. Conversely, a slow, soft-
spoken monotone voice signals lack of interest in the listener or extreme
shyness in the speaker. Conversely, a slow, soft-spoken voice with normal
inﬂections conveys empathy. I often hear this type of communication at
funerals or during tragedies.
Most parents learn to control their kids’ behavior with tonal inﬂections. I
often spoke to my kids in a deep, slow voice to express my displeasure. As with
many parents, if I was extremely displeased, I would drag out my kid’s ﬁrst,
middle, and last name with great eﬀect. A short, clipped “Good” expresses
approval.
Tone of voice delivers the emotional part of your message. I have a Chicago
accent and I tend to clip my words. When I’m in Chicago, word clipping goes
unnoticed because everybody clips their words. However, when I travel to
other parts of the country, people perceive word clipping as being overbearing
and dismissive. Sarcasm can also be misinterpreted without the accompanying
tone of voice that lets the listener know that there is a hidden meaning to the
message. is is the reason why sarcasm should be avoided in emails and text
messages.
