a friend signal. If the person gives you a goofy look or a “get away from me,
you creep” expression, you might have chosen a sourpuss or need more
practice. Over time, you should see an improvement in how people respond to
your friend signals. Further, with practice, you won’t have to consciously think
about sending the signals or how they look; they will become automatic.
Acquiring new skills, or making old skills look authentic when we use them
“in the spotlight,” takes lots of practice. While working to perfect these signals,
you might become discouraged and give up for various reasons, including
embarrassment, lack of immediate mastery of the new skills, or frustration.
is is normal. In studying how people acquire new skills, scientists have
discovered that many novices experience a period of “free fall” early in the
learning experience. During this time, individuals are not comfortable using
the new skills and become frustrated or embarrassed when the skills do not
work as advertised. Instead of continuing to practice the skills, they give up.
Don’t you be one of those people! Persevere through this free-fall phase,
conﬁdent in the knowledge that you will achieve skill mastery with time and
eﬀort. e frustration and discomfort of acquiring new skills will be well worth
the eﬀort because you will be rewarded with superior results in achieving
successful relationships.
at should make smiling very easy to do, consciously or otherwise!
TO ERR IS HUMAN . . . AND MAKES THAT HUMAN MORE LIKABLE, TOO
At the beginning of my lectures, I intentionally make several mistakes that don’t damage my credibility, such as
mispronouncing a word or misspelling a word on the whiteboard. The participants immediately correct my small
errors. With a show of embarrassment, I graciously accept the correction and credit the participants for being
attentive.
This technique accomplishes several objectives. First, the participants making the corrections feel good
about themselves, which builds rapport and friendship. Second, participants are more likely to spontaneously
interact during the lecture without the fear of looking stupid in front of the instructor. After all, they reason, it’s
okay to make mistakes because the instructor already has made several himself. Third, minor mistakes make
me look human. People like lecturers who are subject matter experts yet at the same time possess human
qualities similar to the seminar participants (the Law of Similarity, discussed in Chapter 5).
OBSERVE AND LEARN
Tapping on a cell phone keyboard and having earbuds in place shuts you out
of the sending or receiving of friendship signals. And the lack of personal
interaction with other people reduces the opportunity for you to sharpen your
social skills or learn from observing others.
Learning from others doesn’t even take much eﬀort. All you need to do is
go to a restaurant and people-watch. People feel comfortable communicating
when they are eating or drinking. See if you can determine the status and
intensity of relationships by observing the non verbal signals of nearby couples.
ROMANTIC RELATIONSHIPS
When two people walk into a restaurant you can tell if they are a couple or not
by observing their nonverbal behaviors. Hand holding is a sign of romantic
interest. Couples who hold hands without interlacing their ﬁngers indicate a
less intimate relationship than if they hold hands with their ﬁngers interlaced.
e following sequence of actions typically takes place after the couple sits at a
table or booth: 1) the center piece, menu stand, or condiment rack is moved to
one side of the table, 2) the couple exchange eyebrow ﬂashes, 3) the couple
look at each other for a longer time than they would look at strangers, 4) they
smile, 5) they tilt their heads to one side or the other, 6) they lean in toward
each other, 7) they mirror each other’s posture, 8) they hold hands, 9) they
freely use gestures when they communicate, 10) they whisper, or lower their
voices, to signal to others that the conversation is private and intruders are not
welcome, and 11) they share food. is sequence of activity may not take place
in the exact order listed or may be interrupted by waitstaﬀ, but you will
observe some or all of these nonverbal cues at some point during the course of
dinner.
BROKEN RELATIONSHIPS
Relationships that are strained will become obvious because the normal
nonverbal cues present in a good relationship will be absent. For example, the
couple will not look at each other. eir smiles are forced. One or both will
often look at their plates when they speak. Heads are erect, not tilted. eir
