Using the Internet to ﬁnd “Mr.” or “Ms. Right” can be a rewarding
experience. It can also be a living hell. How your experience turns out depends
on many factors, most of which will be discussed here. Although no one can
guarantee that your Internet-generated relationships will be successful and
trouble-free, there are some things you can do to increase your chances of
experiencing positive outcomes—and reducing negative ones—when it comes
to choosing friends and potential partners online.
LOVE AT FIRST BYTE
e young man was a star Notre Dame football player who fell in love with a
woman he met online. en tragedy struck: his sweetheart died of leukemia.
To make matters worse, she died on the same day the football player’s
grandmother passed away.
e star player’s twin tragedies became a national news item. But that story
was soon eclipsed by an even bigger story: it turned out that the woman he
loved didn’t die after all, because she never lived in the ﬁrst place! It turned out
she was a person created in cyberspace by someone with a very sick sense of
humor.
And then there’s the saga of Sana and Adnan Klaric. It seems the couple’s
married life was not going well and so, unbeknownst to each other, each Klaric
assumed a fake screen name, Sweetie and Prince of Joy respectively, and hit the
online chat rooms complaining about their dismal marriage and searching for a
new “Mr.” and “Mrs.” Right.
It took some time and a lot of keystrokes but at last the two estranged
partners found online individuals who seemed to resonate with their problems
and provide the kind words so missing in their marriage.
Sana and Adnan knew they had found the real loves of their lives. ey
agreed to meet their new partners at a prearranged time and place. On the big
day, Sana and Adnan made excuses to each other about having to leave for
appointments, each making sure their indiscretion would not be detected.
en they set oﬀ to meet their online paramours, the perfect replacements for
what they had back home.
When they arrived at their rendezvous point, Sana and Adnan met their
online lovers for the ﬁrst time. It was not love at ﬁrst sight. It turned out that
Sana and Adnan had unknowingly been carrying on their online aﬀair with
each other!
One might best leave it to ethicists and lawyers to decide if Sana and Adnan
were being unfaithful, as it is diﬃcult to imagine committing adultery with
your own spouse; however, “Sweetie” and “Prince of Joy” were not pleased and,
at last report, were accusing each other of being unfaithful and ﬁling for
divorce.
What do all these stories demonstrate?
1. Relationships developed over the Internet can be as powerful as those developed in face-to-face
interactions, sometimes more so.
2. On the Internet, things are not always as they appear.
3. If a world-class physicist can be duped over the Internet, you probably can be, too.
4. ere are creepy, mean, sick people populating the Internet just as they do in the real world.
5. Scams involving relationships on the Internet are more common than most of us imagine.
ey have become so widespread, in fact, that a documentary ﬁlm, MTV reality series, and
feature ﬁlm have been based on the problem. A word has even been coined, catﬁsh, which, as
Internet attorney Parry Aftab says, refers to “anybody who pretends to be someone who they’re
not on social media. It’s done all the time.” I’ve taken that expression one step further with
“catphish” to also include the hackers who wish to steal your identity.
6. Because of the “cloak of secrecy” provided by the Internet, people will say things in cyberspace
they would never say in a personal interaction.
7. On the Internet, as in real life, if it’s too good to be true, it probably is! Social networks can be
hazardous. No communication posted to the Internet can be guaranteed to remain private. You
must assume that your posts are permanent and public.
8. As in face-to-face communications, pretending to be someone you are not often leads to
unpleasant outcomes.
9. ere are things you can do to navigate the Internet more safely and eﬀectively. Some
suggestions are provided in the following pages. ese suggestions are not only relevant for
individuals seeking love on the Internet; they will be helpful for anyone looking for friends in
cyberspace.
TESTING FOR VERACITY ONLINE AND OFFLINE
Letting our teenagers roam freely on the Internet, especially my daughter, was
a scary proposition for my wife and me. So I taught them some techniques I
used on suspects to determine their veracity. I did this to help protect them
from both online and real-world predators. I oﬀer these techniques to you for
the same reason, to help you guard against deceptive on- and oﬄine
