Reinforcement is the use of reward and punishment meted out by one
individual to another in a relationship. Here are some errors you don’t want to
make in dealing with your signiﬁcant other:
1. Being Unaware at Your Style of Interaction Leads to the Inappropriate Administration of
Rewards and/or Punishments to Others on a Day-to-Day Basis.
Some people, when involved in a long-term relationship, exhibit consistent
patterns of reinforcement with their partner that are not conducive to
maximizing relationship satisfaction. ere are three kinds of individuals who
use reinforcement inappropriately.
The Negativistic Partner
eir motto: “Emphasize the negative; ignore the positive.”
eir credo: “What credit do you deserve for doing something right? at’s your job!”
eir behavioral approach to a partner: negativity and punishment.
Negativistic partners seem to have mastered the “See, I told you so” routine
when you’re wrong and the “I don’t see you” routine when you’re right. e
person living with a negativistic partner usually utters this oft-heard lament:
“e only time I hear from my partner is when I do something wrong.” Is it
any wonder such behavior creates bitterness and a sense of frustration? Nobody
likes to feel that when they do something good, it is ignored, while any
mistakes receive maximum attention. As one wife so aptly told her husband,
“At least if you’re going to criticize my mistakes, give equal time to my
successes.” Negativistic partners need to recognize that it is appropriate to
criticiz e their signiﬁcant other if they do something wrong that needs
correcting; however, it is also appropriate to praise that individual when they
do something well.
The Perfectionistic Partner
eir motto: “ere’s always room for improvement.”
eir credo: “If it isn’t perfect; it isn’t worth it.”
eir behavioral approach to a partner: sets unreasonable standards.
e perfectionistic partner demands high levels of eﬀort to achieve
perfection when competency will suﬃce with far less eﬀort expended.
Perfectionistic individuals aren’t unwilling to praise their partners for a task or
chore well done, as long as it is done perfectly. And therein lies the problem.
Because the perfectionistic partner sets standards so high, hardly anybody can
reach the level of performance necessary to trigger a kind word. us the
perfectionistic partner does the negativistic partner one better, requiring such
high levels of performance it is literally impossible to satisfy them in the ﬁrst
place! e most successful way perfectionistic partners can modify their over-
the-top demands in a relationship is to temper their standards to a reasonable
level, one that values competency and doesn’t demand behavioral performance
that is largely beyond reach. Perfectionistic partners should come to
understand that the amount of time and eﬀort needed to turn competent
performance into perfect performance is seldom worth it.
The Sadistic Partner
eir motto: “One mistake wipes out all good performance.”
eir credo: “To err is human; to pay for it, divine.”
eir behavioral approach: a total imbalance between the rewarding of good performance versus
the punishment of errors or mistakes.
Sadistic partners earn their title because they remind us of naughty children
who pick the wings oﬀ butterﬂies. On the surface, they seem kind enough.
ey give praise and recognition to their partners on a regular basis. But, wait!
ese individuals have a unique, and unrealistic, way of balancing their
compliments and criticis m when it comes to dealing with their partners. Here’s
how they operate: eir partners can accumulate as many compliments as their
behaviors warrant, but if they do something wrong along the way, that one
mistake “wipes out” all or most of the praise earned along the way. To the
sadistic partner who wants to change for the better, you must recognize a level
of “equity” between the weighing of good versus not-so-good behavior on the
part of your signiﬁcant other, and a recognition that accumulated incidents of
positive behavior should not be rendered worthless because of one negative
incident.
