After retiring from the FBI, I went on to get my doctorate in psychology
and a university teaching position. It was during this phase of my life that I
ﬂeshed out my Like Switch strategies to help you achieve successful
interpersonal relationships at home, at work, or anywhere else person-to-
person interaction is involved. For example:
• New salespeople can use the techniques presented in this book to establish a clientele list from
scratch.
• Experienced salespeople can also beneﬁt from learning how to maintain or enhance existing
relationships as well as from developing additional clients.
• All levels and types of employees, from managers at Wall Street ﬁrms to restaurant waitstaﬀ, can
use these tactics to interact more eﬀectively with their supervisors, colleagues, subordinates,
and customers.
• Parents can use the strategies to repair, maintain, and strengthen their relationships with their
children.
• Consumers can use this information to get better service, better deals, and better personalized
attention.
• And, of course, people seeking friends or romantic relationships can use these social skills to
overcome this inherently diﬃcult experience (made even more challenging in our digitally
focused society).
e Like Switch is for anyone seeking to make new friends, to maintain or
enhance existing relationships, to make brief encounters with people more
enjoyable, or to get better tips and bonuses.
CONQUERING THE FRIENDSHIP CHALLENGE
Human beings are social animals. As a species, we are hardwired to seek out
others. is desire is rooted in our primitive beginnings, when togetherness
gave us the best chance to move up the food chain as we emerged from our
caves and struggled for survival in a hostile and unforgiving world. us, one
would assume that making friends would be easy, even automatic. Sadly, this
isn’t so. In poll after poll, study after study, an increasing number of people
report feeling isolated and incapable of developing rudimentary, let alone
meaningful, long- lasting relationships. is problem has grown worse with the
introduction of social media, which further distances us from face-to-face,
meaningful social interaction.
Dealing with people, particularly with individuals you don’t know, can be a
challenging, even scary, experience. Whether you are a man or a woman
doesn’t seem to matter. e fear is there: fear of embarrassment, fear of
rejection, fear of causing hurt feelings, fear of making a bad impression, even
the fear of being used or taken advantage of. e good news is that
relationships don’t have to be an invitation to disaster. If you are struggling
with friendship issues or just want to improve the friendships you already have,
take heart. You are not alone and your situation is not hopeless. is book is
designed to allay your concerns about interacting with others at work, at
home, with strangers, or with loved ones.
e techniques presented in this book provide you with the best possible
chance, based on the latest scientiﬁc evidence, to get people to like you,
without saying a word. Eventually, though, you have to speak to people. Words
translate the initial feelings of goodwill into friendships and, in some cases,
lifelong relationships. is book presents the nonverbal cues along with the
verbal prompts that can get anyone to like you instantly.
Rewarding personal relationships are within your reach. It’s not a matter of
guesswork or luck. It is the result of using proven scientiﬁc knowledge and
techniques in dealing with other individuals. e opportunity to make friends
is three steps away:
1. You must be willing to learn and master the techniques presented in this book. e techniques are
similar to the power tools used by construction workers. e key is to let the tools do the work.
When I was young, I routinely used a handsaw to cut wood. One day my father let me use his
newly purchased circular saw. I took the power saw in hand and began to cut a piece of wood.
I applied the same pressure to the power saw that I would have applied to a hand saw. My
father tapped me on the shoulder and told me to ease up on the pressure and let the saw do the
work. e techniques in this book are based on similarly sound principles. Simply apply the
techniques and relax, be yourself, and let the techniques do the work. You will be amazed at
the results.
2. You must actually use this new knowledge in dealing with people in your everyday life. Knowing the
best way to do something is great, but only when you actually utilize what you have learned.
Always remember that knowledge without action is knowledge wasted.
3. You need to constantly practice what you have learned. Friendship skills are like skills in general.
e more you use them, the more proﬁcient you become; the less you use them, the quicker
you lose them. If you are willing to take these three steps, you will ﬁnd that making friends
becomes as automatic as breathing.
e Like Switch is within your reach. To ﬂip it on, just utilize the
information you’ll be learning in the following pages and watch your LQ
(Likability Quotient) soar.
