expressive gestures (including “thumbs-up” sign); (d) prolonged eye contact;
and (e) smiles.
Picture 10: At ﬁrst glance, it looks like the young man is in charge because he is
pointing his ﬁnger. However, note that he is leaning backward. (Pointing a
ﬁnger at someone while leaning backward is counterintuitive, you don’t stick
your ﬁnger in someone’s face and lean away if you feel you’re in charge.) e
young lady is displaying “arms akimbo” (an aggressive nonverbal signal) in an
attempt to make up for the young man’s height advantage. e young lady has
her head tilted, with the carotid artery exposed, signaling that she is not afraid
of the young man. Diagnosis: e young man is on the losing end of this
interaction based on his backward lean and the young lady’s nonverbal
posturing, which indicates a lack of fear based on her aggressive stance.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
I would like to express my appreciation to Dave and Lynda Mills of Dave Mills
Photography in Lancaster, California, for taking the photographs in this book.
Both Dave and Lynda graciously contributed their photographic skills to
provide accurate depictions of selected techniques presented in these pages. I
would like to thank Andrew Cardone and my daughter, Brooke Schafer, for
volunteering their time and talent to serve as models for the photographs in
this book. I would like to thank Jenny Chaney, L. Michael Wells, Daniel
Potter, Cory Garza, and Tony DeCicco for reviewing the manuscript and
oﬀering their comments and suggestions. I would also like to thank Randy
Marcoz, whom I have worked with for many years teaching and developing
new ideas to enhance people’s communication skills. A special thanks to Mike
Dilley, author and historian, whom I have worked with for many years
developing and perfecting the many techniques presented in this book. He also
reviewed and edited the manuscript and provided invaluable advice in crafting
the ﬁnal draft. I would also like to acknowledge the eﬀorts of my English
teachers throughout my educational career, who had the courage to identify
the weakness in my writing and the patience to help me strengthen my writing
skills.
JACK SCHAFER
I have been blessed with wonderful people who have provided me with
encouragement, inspiration, and insight when I needed it most. I would like to
recognize them here—alphabetically—and thank each one for adding meaning
and joy to my life. If I have inadvertently overlooked anyone, my sincerest
apologies.
Lewis Andrews, Alan and Susan Balfour, Loretta Barrett, Ann and Steve
Batchelor, Lyle Berman, Carole Bloch, Stephanie Boyer, Avery Cardoza, C. T.
