Remember Vladimir, the spy discussed in the Introduction? As you may
recall, after days of reading the newspaper and sitting silently with Vladimir, he
asked me why I kept coming back day after day. I folded the newspaper over,
looked at him, and said, “Because I want to talk to you.” en I immediately
returned the newspaper to the upright position and continued reading,
ignoring him. is action further increased Vladimir’s curiosity and created
scarcity. Finally, Vladimir made up his mind to talk to me and I ignored him,
increasing Vladimir’s drive to talk to me.
INCREASED RESTRAINT INCREASES DRIVE
Parents are fully aware of this law! If you tell your children not to do
something, they want to do it all the more. My own daughter went through a
teenage phase of testing her mom and me. She once brought home a young
man to meet us. He had four-inch-high gelled prongs that stood atop his head,
tattoos covering most of his exposed skin, and a motorcycle in our driveway. I
cordially greeted him without saying what I really felt about him or how
disappointed I was with my daughter’s choice of companion.
e next day, my daughter asked me what I thought of the young man. I
wanted to command her never to see him again, but I knew that if I increased
restraint, she would be that much more motivated to continue to date him.
Instead, I chose the following strategy. I told my daughter that her mother and
I raised her to make good judgments and that we trusted her decisions. If she
felt the young man was a good person to have in her life, we would support
her decision.
I never saw him again.
Fast-forward ten years. My daughter is now twenty-six years old. We sat in
the kitchen reminiscing about her teen years. To my surprise, she brought up
the young man. She admitted that she brought him home to make her mom
and me mad for some now forgotten transgression we committed. She further
admitted that when I told her that I trusted her judgment and knew she would
make the right decision, her conscience panged. She knew he was wrong for
her and that she was wrong to bring him home to spite us. She commented
that it was ironic that she intended to make us mad but, in the end, she was
the one who felt guilty. It took ten years to know if my strategy worked or not.
I was relieved to know that it did.
THE LAW OF THE ROCKY ROAD
When two people meet and do not immediately like one another, especially in
a romantic context, and then bond at a later time, they form a closer
relationship than if they had hit it oﬀ immediately. is phenomenon is
frequently highlighted in “romcom” (romantic comedy) movies. In the usual
scenario, a man meets a woman. e man does not like the woman and the
woman doesn’t like the man. Before the ﬁlm ends, they become romantically
involved. A romantic rocky road often leads to a more intense romantic
relationship.
A NEW STRATEGY TO BUTTERING UP THE BOSS: BUTTERING DOW N THE
BOSS
I recall a time when I was assigned to a new supervisor. Instead of welcoming
her with open arms, as did the rest of my squad mates, I purposefully remained
distant and displayed neutral to slightly negative body language. Gradually,
with each conversation we had, I began to display more positive nonverbal
cues. I completed the turnaround several months later by telling her I thought
she was a good supervisor and respected her strong managerial skills. From that
day forward, we formed a closer relationship than if I had immediately
accepted her. is closer relationship provided me with a distinct advantage
when I asked for scarce investigative resources, time oﬀ, and other favors.
THE LAW OF PERSONALITY
ere are literally hundreds of personality “types” or “characteristics” that have
been identiﬁed in scientiﬁc and popular literature. ey refer to consistent
behavioral patterns exhibited by an individual in his or her everyday behavior.
When somebody says, “that individual just isn’t my type,” they might be
commenting on the person’s physical appearance or strongly held beliefs (for
