7
NURTURING AND SUSTAINING LONG- TERM
RELATIONSHIPS
People don’t care about how much you know until they ﬁrst know how much you care.
—ZIG ZIGLAR
All long-term relationships start out as short-term relationships and develop
the same way as all friendships do, through an understanding and utilization of
all the tools for building and sustaining rapport. As time passes, some of our
relationships grow from friendship to romantic. When a relationship has
matured to being a loving interaction, a new behavioral focus is required to
keep the passion and the partnership intact and intense.
is behavior, simple to understand but challenging to sustain, is caring.
ink for a moment of every person you have known on more than a casual
basis, such as family, friends, colleagues, and mentors. en ask yourself:
“Which of these individuals would I hold in highest esteem and carry out their
wishes most willingly?” Chances are that person is someone who you believe
cares about you. You sense this in their actions and in their general demeanor.
Trying to deﬁne caring is a bit like deﬁning the term pornography. When a
Supreme Court justice was asked to deﬁne that term he answered, “I can’t
deﬁne it, but I can recognize it when I see it.” So, too, with caring. To try to
use words to capture the essence of caring leaves us struggling to recognize the
emotional, deeply passionate component of what caring is all about, even
though we can readily recognize it when we experience it. Caring is about the
heart rather than the head. It is about a relationship that goes beyond robotic,
intellectual, surface interactions and taps into the very essence of who we are at
our innermost level of feeling.
Caring allows us to reach the higher elevations of relationship growth, and
the letters that spell out the word also tell us what we need to do to care
eﬀectively.
C = Compassion/concern
A = Active listening
R = Reinforcement
E = Empathy
Let’s examine each of these words in turn to help deﬁne what must be done
to keep long-term relationships with signiﬁcant others healthy and happy.
COMPASSION/CONCERN
People who are caring individuals show an honest concern for others. Not a
passing comment or a ﬂippant response to someone who is hurting, but rather
a genuine sense of compassion for what that person is experiencing and a
commitment to help make things better. In long-term relationships there will
be many times when one or both partners are facing crises. It is here where the
true level of concern, or lack of it, becomes evident. It is relatively easy to
maintain a long-term relationship when things are going well; it is in the
crucible of a crisis that the true character of an individual is revealed and found
to be wonderful or wanting.
In a sense, there is little one can imagine that is more beautiful than two
people who have come to depend on each other to be there as a caring partner
when the need arises, as it most certainly will. Perhaps the most enduring form
of caring comes when one person becomes a caregiver for a sick or injured
partner. To witness this kind of selﬂess sacriﬁce, day after day, sometimes year
after year, is to see the embodiment of caring in its purest form.
Hopefully, you will never be called upon to care for a signiﬁcant other in
sickness (rather than in health). Fortunately, on a daily basis you can do little
things that let your partner know you care about them. Sharing the workload,
doing something extra special for no reason, taking the time to give a
compliment to your “special person,” oﬀering reassurance when they falter,
being there when they need you, oﬀering a kind word and a helping hand:
ese are all acts of caring that a compassionate individual undertakes. is
