environment for matchups. Want to ﬁnd fellow stamp collectors? ere’s an
Internet group for that. Interested in people who exhibit antique automobiles?
ere’s an Internet group for that. Looking for that special group of sports
fanatics who also volunteer at animal shelters and eat organic apples from the
state of Washington? ere’s an Internet group for that. Well, maybe.
e point is that with millions of people on the Internet and thousands of
chat rooms and special interest groups devoted to almost any activity, real or
imaginable, the chance to develop friendships with people sharing similar
interests is never more than a click away.
Numbers
If you’re looking for a friend with speciﬁc qualiﬁcations and interests, where
would you rather look: in a bar or other public place that might hold a
hundred people, or on the Internet, where tens of millions of people await to
be clicked on? e sheer number of people that go online increases your
chances of ﬁnding persons of interest who best ﬁt your particular needs.
Less Chance of Being Embarrassed
Anonymity and the ability to start and end relationships with a click of a
mouse make the online user much less likely to face the humiliation and
embarrassment that comes with face-to-face disapproval or outright rejection.
Of course, should an online user post information and pictures of a
questionable nature, the chance of embarrassment deﬁnitely is increased (as has
been the case with numerous high-proﬁle politicians and celebrities over the
years).
The Ability to Prequalify Potential Friends
Particularly on dating sites, individuals looking for partners have the
opportunity to describe what they want in a potential respondent. Of course,
not all people reading the qualiﬁcations abide by them. Many individuals will
contact you on the Internet even when they do not possess the qualiﬁcations
you are looking for. Still, screening mechanisms on certain online sites can be
beneﬁcial in limiting the number of people who contact you.
The Opportunity to “Check People Out”
e Internet is information-rich. It provides a wealth of information for those
people who know how to get it or are interested in learning more about
something or somebody. e Internet should be seen as a tool to learn more
about the people you are considering to develop relationships with, whether
that person is someone you meet face-to-face or online. Obviously, this
information search is more important for potential online friends, because you
don’t have the advantage of information-gathering through verbal and
nonverbal cues available in real-life interactions.
ere is simply no denying that the advent of person-to-person online
communication has dramatically altered the landscape of seeking friends and
building relationships. As this form of digital interaction continues to grow in
popularity, it will have an even greater impact on the way people develop
relationships in the years to come.
What does all this mean for you? To paraphrase Charles Dickens: “It can be
the best of times; it can be the worst of times.” When employed correctly and
with appropriate safeguards, establishing friendships in the digital world can be
a rewarding and fruitful experience; however, plunging headlong into Internet
relationships without proper attention to the potential risks involved is a
sureﬁre recipe for disaster. Before you ﬁre up your laptop or reach for your
smartphone, here are some important things to keep in mind.
CAUTION: IMMORTALITY AHEAD
Facebook. Twitter. Instagram. Chat rooms. Special interest groups. Email.
Blogs. Internet search engines. Dating sites. A literal cornu copia of
opportunities to search for and meet people who could end up being friends or
even lifelong partners.
But be afraid, or to paraphrase the famous Jaws trailer, be very afraid of the
potential price you pay whenever you go on the Internet. Anything you say,
anywhere you visit, any pictures you post, even your emails and instant
