Generally, introverts and extroverts behave diﬀerently in social situations.
Extroverts tend to be more outgoing when they don’t know many people.
Introverts, on the other hand, tend to feel uncomfortable in large groups of
unfamiliar people. However, when introverts are in the company of friends or
are comfortable with their surroundings, they can become as outgoing as
extroverts (for a while, at least).
One method to determine if a person is an extrovert is to begin a sentence
and deliberately pause for a few seconds. Extroverts will generally complete the
sentence for you. Introverts will not. e same method can be used to
determine if you have established rapport with an introvert. When introverts
are comfortable with the people they are with, they will often complete
sentences in the same manner in which extroverts do. e diﬀerence in the use
of this method is that you can identify extroverts even if you don’t know that
the person you are speaking with is an introvert or an extrovert. To test rapport
with an introvert, you must ﬁrst determine that the person you are talking
with is an introvert.
I recall a case I spent months investigating. Suﬃcient personal and
biographical information was painstakingly gathered to determine what type of
personality the suspect possessed. Based on that information, I custom-
designed an investigative strategy to dovetail with the suspect’s personality. e
key to the success of the operation was our secretary. Her assignment was to
make a telephone call to the suspect that would initiate the operation. I
rehearsed with the secretary until she was comfortable with her role. She made
the telephone call but the suspect did not immediately take the bait. I
encouraged her to engage the suspect in casual conversation to reassure him.
e conversation became very casual and the suspect relaxed, and
unfortunately so did the secretary. e suspect asked the secretary where she
worked. She blurted out, “I work for the FBI.” us ended the undercover
operation. In true extroverted fashion, the secretary spoke without thinking.
PERSONALITY AND PURCHASES
If you are a salesperson, you might want to consider if your customer is an
extrovert or an introvert before making your pitch. Be sure to allow your
introverted customers time to think about your sales proposal. Introverts take
in information, mull it over, and then come to a decision. Pressing introverts
to reach a quick decision may force them to say no because they are not
comfortable making immediate decisions. Conversely, extroverts can be
pressured to some degree to buy your product “right now” because they are
more comfortable making impulsive decisions.
Rarely do people exhibit entirely extroverted or introverted characteristics.
Personality traits fall somewhere along a continuum. Some people actually
exhibit almost equal extroverted and introverted characteristics; however, most
people do have a preference for one or the other, and behave accordingly.
Introverts can act like extroverts when required to do so. If, for example, an
introvert has a job that requires them to be outgoing and gregarious, they can
do it, although it is more taxing to behave in such a manner than it would be if
they were natural extroverts. Moreover, when they are oﬀ the job, they return
to being introverts. ese contrasting lifestyles rarely conﬂict because a person’s
working world and private world normally don’t overlap.
e same can’t be said when it comes to personal relationships. If introverts
act like extroverts when they ﬁrst meet someone, the person they are seeing
often receives a shock if the relationship continues and the introvert reverts to
their “normal” behavior. Revealing your true personality when ﬁrst meeting
someone is far better than engaging in a Dr. Jekyll and Mr. Hyde approach
when you want to develop healthy, strong relationships.
THE LAW OF COMPLEMENTARITY (GIVING COMPLIMENTS)
People like to be complimented. It makes them feel good about themselves
and, according to the Golden Rule of Friendship, they are going to feel good
about you. e result: a better chance to make a friend or strengthen an
existing friendship.
Compliments, to be eﬀective, should be sincere and deserved. Paying
someone a compliment when you don’t really believe what you’re saying or
when the recipient of the compliment hasn’t earned the accolade is
counterproductive to good relationship building and is lying (the antithesis of
trust).
