or abandonment. Watching couples interact with one another when they reach
this stage in their relationship is a wonder to behold.
ese same observational relationship evaluations can be made with
businesspeople making deals, people trying to pick someone up, or just friends
out for a casual meal or drink. e point of people-watching is to sharpen your
observation skills, allowing you to become more aware of how people naturally
interact with one another and enhance your ability to accurately interpret what
you see. If you practice enough, your observations and skills in evaluating
human behavior will become automatic, thus making you a more eﬀective
communicator.
3
THE GOLDEN RULE OF FRIENDSHIP
You can make more friends in two months by becoming genuinely interested in other
people than you can in two years by trying to get other people interested in you.
—DALE CARNEGIE
e nonverbal friend signals you learned in the previous chapter are designed
to set the stage for the start of a positive relationship with another person.  ey
function like a comedian whose warm-up act is designed to get the audience in
the right frame of mind before the headliner makes his appearance. Used
correctly, these signals will make your person of interest more receptive to
interacting with you, should you choose to approach and speak with them. So
let’s assume you do choose to make contact with somebody. What now? You
have reached your “moment of truth” with them.
MAKING YOUR “MOMENT OF TRUTH” A SUCCESS
Many years ago, a businessman named Jan Carlzon was named CEO of a
struggling European airline company, Scandinavian Airlines System (SAS), and
given the formidable task of making it proﬁtable. He accomplished this
objective with such speed that his feat became the focal point of management
cases and literature highlighting business turnarounds.
How did he achieve such success? By giving his frontline staﬀ the power to
solve customer service problems on the spot, without having to check with
their supervisors ﬁrst. is greatly improved customer satisfaction, employee
morale, and corporate proﬁt . . . a  win-win situation for all involved.
What was interesting about Carlzon’s philosophy and business strategy, as it
relates to this book, is the importance he put on the point of contact between
