accolade a negative impression of you. After all, no one likes to feel they are
being manipulated or lied to. People know what they are good at and where
they are weak. If you tell someone that they are good at something and they
know they aren’t, they are likely to question your motive because they
recognize the discrepancy between your assessment of them and the way they
really perform.
An alternate, and vastly superior, method of using compliments exists. is
approach avoids the pitfalls inherent in complimenting another person and
instead allows others to compliment themselves. is technique avoids the
problem of appearing insincere. When people compliment themselves,
sincerity is not an issue, and people rarely miss an opportunity to compliment
themselves if given the opportunity (which you conveniently provide).
e key to allowing people to compliment themselves is to construct a
dialogue that predisposes people to recognize their attributes or
accomplishments and give themselves a silent pat on the back. When people
compliment themselves, they feel good about themselves, and according to the
Golden Rule of Friendship, they will like you because you provided the
opportunity to make them feel good about themselves.
Referring back to Ben’s ﬂedgling relationship with Vicki, he can set the
stage for Vicki to compliment herself.
BEN: en you’ve been really busy lately. (sophisticated empathic statement)
VICKI: Yeah, I worked sixty hours a week for the last three weeks getting a project done.
BEN: It takes a lot of dedication and determination to commit to a project of that magnitude. (a
statement that provides Vicki the opportunity to compliment herself)
VICKI: (inking) I sacriﬁced a lot to get that mega project done and I did a very good job, if I
may say so myself.
Note that Ben did not directly tell Vicki he thought she was a dedicated
and determined person. However, it was not hard for Vicki to recognize those
attributes in herself and apply them to her circumstances at work. In the event
Vicki does not see herself as a dedicated and determined person, no damage
will be done to the ﬂedgling relationship. What Ben said is true regardless of
Vicki’s self-assessment, so his comment at worst will go unnoticed, and at best
will provide the impetus for Vicki to feel good about herself (and Ben). Based
on human nature, even if Vicki was in reality not a dedicated and determined
person, she would likely apply those favorable attributes to herself. Few people
would admit in public, much less to themselves, that they are not dedicated,
determined people.
THIRD-PARTY COMPLIMENTS
You can use a third party to compliment a person you want to  befriend—
without doing it yourself—and still get the “credit” for making the target of your
compliment feel good about themselves and, by extension, feel good about
you. When you directly compliment other people, particularly anybody who
suspects you might want something from them (for example: your date, your
boss, or a friend), they tend to discount your eﬀorts because they suspect you
are intentionally trying to inﬂuence them through ﬂattery. A third-party
compliment eliminates this skepticism.
To construct a third-party compliment you will need to ﬁnd a mutual
friend or acquaintance who knows both you and your person of interest.
Further, you should be relatively certain that the third-party individual you
choose will be likely to pass along your compliment to the person for whom it
was intended. If this transmission of information is successful, the next time
you meet your person of interest, he or she will see you from a positive
perspective. Consider the following exchange and assume you are Mark.
MIKE: I met Mark the other day. He told me he thinks you’re really bright. In fact, he said
you’re one of the most capable problem solvers he has ever met.
SONJA: Oh, really? He said that?
MIKE: at’s what he told me.
Sonja will more readily accept this compliment as related by Mike than if
you (Mark) directly told her the same thing. Additionally, Mike feels free to
tell Sonja exactly what you said, which you may or may not be socially allowed
to say at the beginning stages of a relationship. Indirectly you, through Mike,
allowed Sonja to compliment herself, which makes her feel good about herself,
thus predisposing her to like you before you meet her for the ﬁrst time or at
the point in your relationship when she receives Mike’s third-party
compliment.
CASHING IN ON THIRD-PARTY COMPLIMENTS AT WORK
