Men and women feel the need to meet standards of beauty that society
establishes, and which are reinforced by the media. People lie to bring
themselves closer to the standard image in the hope of attracting a friend or a
mate. People who believe they do not meet those standards feel less attractive
and are less conﬁdent that they can attract and keep a partner without lying
about who they really are and how they really look. is pattern will not
change in the foreseeable future; to the contrary, it will most likely intensify as
online dating and Internet chat rooms become more popular and proliferate.
Anyone who seeks relationships on the Internet should be aware of the line
that separates a “best impression” proﬁle from a deceptive one. A deceptive
online proﬁle may attract a suitor or friend, but once the deception is
discovered, trust, disappointment, and betrayal becomes the centerpiece of the
relationship instead of excitement, hopes, and dreams. If you want to try
Internet relationship building, be honest in your online proﬁle and be patient.
e right relationship is worth the wait.
HOW TO REDUCE YOUR CHANCES OF BEING HOOK ED BY A CATPHISH
e ﬂit of an eye, the turn of the head, or a slight change in voice pitch
provides clues to a person’s personality, sincerity, and veracity. As cited earlier
in the book, our brains constantly monitor verbal and non verbal cues to assess
others to see if they pose a potential threat. If the cues are friend signals, then
the brain tends to ignore the behaviors. If the cues are foe signals, the brain
initiates the ﬁght or ﬂight response and we go shields up to protect ourselves
against the threat or potential threat.
Nonverbal and verbal cues can undergo dramatic changes from second to
second and from one word to the next. Monitoring these changes can mean
the diﬀerence between relationship happiness and relationship hell. People are
comfortable using verbal and nonverbal cues to assess others and rely heavily
on this method to protect themselves against initiating or continuing bad
relationships.
Internet relationships lack the cues necessary for people to make similar
judgments. Emoticons help decode written communications, but they are not
enough. Decoding an unseen person’s personality, sincerity, and veracity
requires additional skills when communicating on the Internet. People are
poor judges of their Internet partners because the cues they rely on in face-to-
face exchanges are missing. e most reliable method people have to assess
others is no longer available to them. ey must rely on unpracticed
techniques that have not yet been tested for reliability. e brain has not built
up enough data to discriminate between friend and foe signals embedded in
Internet communications. Building Internet detection skills takes time. Here
are some of the potential problems you might encounter in determining the
veracity and value of a potential online relationship.
TRUTH BIAS
People tend to believe others. is phenomenon, referred to as the truth bias,
allows society and commerce to run smoothly and eﬃciently. Absent the truth
bias, people would spend an inordinate amount of time checking data
collected from others. e truth bias also serves as a social default.
Relationships with friends and business colleagues would become strained if
their veracity were constantly questioned. Consequently, people typically
believe others until evidence to the contrary surfaces.
e truth bias provides liars with an advantage because people want to
believe what they hear, see, or read. e truth bias diminishes when people
become aware of the possibility of deception. e truth bias predisposes people
to believe what others write in emails and texts. Absent verbal and nonverbal
cues, the veracity of written communications is not as easily called into
question.
Another characteristic of the truth bias is that when people do see a few
loose ends or minor contradictions in a person’s story, they tend to excuse the
discrepancy because to do otherwise would call the person’s words or behaviors
into question. It’s easier to excuse away minor diﬀerences than to confront the
person. e best defense against the truth bias online is judicious skepticism
and use of the “competing hypotheses” technique (see the following page).
THE PRIMACY EFFECT
