anticipation on their faces. Considering the time of day and the fact that most
students were not known for arriving early to class, I wondered what was going
on. I asked them who they were and why they had decided to show up at such
an early hour.
“Do you remember Tim from your previous class?” one of the students
asked.
“Yes,” I said.
“Several weeks ago the two of us went to a bar with Tim. He told us about
your lecture on inﬂuence and rapport building.”
“And . . . ?”  I still didn’t see where this was leading.
“Tim bragged that he learned in class how to pick up ladies.”
“Obviously, we were skeptical,” said the second student.
“So we put him to the test,” the ﬁrst student continued. “We picked a
random woman who was in the club and challenged Tim to get her to come to
our table and have a drink with us, without saying a word.”
“What did he do?” I inquired.
“He took us up on the challenge,” the student exclaimed. “We thought he
was nuts. But then, about forty-ﬁve minutes later, the woman came over to our
table and asked if she could join us for a drink. We still ﬁnd it hard to believe,
and we saw it happen.”
I gave the students a quizzical look. “Do you know how he did it?”
“No!” exclaimed one of them. And then, in unison, both of them said,
“at’s what we came here to learn!”
My ﬁrst reaction to their comments was to assert the professionalism
expected of me, and I told them the purpose of the classroom training was to
teach students to be eﬀective intelligence oﬃcers, not pickup artists. It was my
second reaction that took me by surprise, an epiphany of sorts. inking of
Tim’s antics, I suddenly realized that the same techniques used to recruit spies
could be employed to become a victor in the so-called dating game. Even more
important, in a broader sense, these techniques could be used whenever a
person wants to win anyone over in virtually any personal interaction. It was
that realization that served as the launchpad for this book and all the
information contained within it.
After retiring from the FBI, I went on to get my doctorate in psychology
and a university teaching position. It was during this phase of my life that I
ﬂeshed out my Like Switch strategies to help you achieve successful
interpersonal relationships at home, at work, or anywhere else person-to-
person interaction is involved. For example:
• New salespeople can use the techniques presented in this book to establish a clientele list from
scratch.
• Experienced salespeople can also beneﬁt from learning how to maintain or enhance existing
relationships as well as from developing additional clients.
• All levels and types of employees, from managers at Wall Street ﬁrms to restaurant waitstaﬀ, can
use these tactics to interact more eﬀectively with their supervisors, colleagues, subordinates,
and customers.
• Parents can use the strategies to repair, maintain, and strengthen their relationships with their
children.
• Consumers can use this information to get better service, better deals, and better personalized
attention.
• And, of course, people seeking friends or romantic relationships can use these social skills to
overcome this inherently diﬃcult experience (made even more challenging in our digitally
focused society).
e Like Switch is for anyone seeking to make new friends, to maintain or
enhance existing relationships, to make brief encounters with people more
enjoyable, or to get better tips and bonuses.
CONQUERING THE FRIENDSHIP CHALLENGE
Human beings are social animals. As a species, we are hardwired to seek out
others. is desire is rooted in our primitive beginnings, when togetherness
gave us the best chance to move up the food chain as we emerged from our
caves and struggled for survival in a hostile and unforgiving world. us, one
would assume that making friends would be easy, even automatic. Sadly, this
isn’t so. In poll after poll, study after study, an increasing number of people
report feeling isolated and incapable of developing rudimentary, let alone
meaningful, long- lasting relationships. is problem has grown worse with the
introduction of social media, which further distances us from face-to-face,
meaningful social interaction.
Dealing with people, particularly with individuals you don’t know, can be a
challenging, even scary, experience. Whether you are a man or a woman
