Staking a claim, but not a sexual touch.
THE SPY WHO WAS TAKEN ABACK
Touching the small of the back provided a critical clue in an espionage case
against an FBI agent who, it turned out, provided classiﬁed information to a
foreign government for over twenty years. is agent recruited a source from a
country hostile to the United States. Over the period of their relationship, the
source convinced the agent to provide classiﬁed information that was
eventually passed on to the hostile foreign government.
e members of the Behavioral Analysis Program obtained a series of
videotapes depicting the agent interacting with his source. On one of the tapes,
he was observed touching his source on the small of her back. Based on this
gesture, the BAP team was able to determine that on or before that date the
FBI agent had engaged in sex with his source. A possible motive was detected
for the agent to knowingly provide classiﬁed information to a hostile
government. is led to an investigation that uncovered his complicity in the
illegal transmission of classiﬁed documents to a foreign government.
PREENING (“GROOMING”) BEHAVIORS
Preening gestures such as picking lint oﬀ a partner’s clothes or straightening his
tie or coat are also signs of good rapport. Self-preening, on the other hand,
particularly when it is done to avoid looking at the other person or carried on
over an extended period of time, is often a foe signal indicating lack of interest
in the relationship.
Researchers identiﬁed a list of grooming behaviors that can be used to assess
the intensity of romantic relationships. e more grooming behaviors that are
present, the more intense the relationship. is checklist is a good way to assess
your romantic relationships. Holly Nelson and Glen Geher developed the
following partial list of positive grooming activities.
1. Do you run your ﬁngers through your signiﬁcant other’s hair?
2. Do you wash your signiﬁcant other’s hair or body while  showering/bathing?
3. Do you shave your signiﬁcant other’s legs/face?
4. Do you wipe away your signiﬁcant other’s tears when he or she cries?
5. Do you brush or play with your signiﬁcant other’s hair?
6. Do you wipe away or dry liquid spills oﬀ your signiﬁcant other?
7. Do you clean and/or trim your signiﬁcant other’s ﬁngernails or toenails?
8. Do you brush dirt, leaves, lint, bugs, etc. oﬀ your signiﬁcant other?
9. Do you scratch your signiﬁcant other’s back or other body parts?
10. Do you wipe food and/or crumbs oﬀ your signiﬁcant other’s face or body?
Getting “groomed” is a sign of good rapport.
