explain why it will.” I knew exactly what point the boss had issues with,
because his lips pursed when I made a speciﬁc statement. Now I knew what
was troubling him and my statement bought me some time to respond to his
concern and convince him my idea was worthy before he made any verbal
declaration, which is hard to reverse once it is publicly stated.
e next time you present a project or proposition to your supervisor,
watch for the lip purse display. If your supervisor purses his or her lips during
your presentation, you know that he or she has already formed a thought in
opposition to your proposal. Once you see a lip purse, you should attempt to
change your supervisor’s mind before he or she vocalizes opposition. Be ready
with an empathic statement. Try: “So, you don’t think what I am saying makes
much sense. Let me go over a few things that will show you that what I am
proposing is the best course of action.” You acknowledge your supervisor’s
doubts and present counterarguments to change his or her mind before the
negative thought is voiced.
Lip Bite
LIP BITE
Another technique to “read a person’s mind” is to watch for a lip bite. A lip
bite is the soft biting or tugging of the upper or lower lip with the teeth. is
nonverbal gesture indicates that the person has something to say but is hesitant
to say it, for myriad reasons. Hence the old adage “Bite your lip,” meaning
keep your mouth shut and don’t say anything has validity. I often see lip biting
when I lecture. I’ll take it as a signal to construct an empathic statement such
as “It looks like you want to add something to the conversation,” to encourage
the students to express themselves. Most students are surprised that I can read
their minds and they feel good about themselves because I’m paying attention
to them.
LIP COMPRESSION
Lip compression has a similar meaning to the lip bite, but it has a more
negative connotation. A lip compression occurs when the upper and lower lips
are tightly pressed together. e lip compression indicates that the person you
are talking to has something to say but is reluctant to do so. Right before
suspects confess, I often saw a lip compression. e suspects wanted to say
something but they pressed their lips together to prevent the words from
coming out.
