e other person will not consciously notice your mirroring behavior
because it falls within the human baseline and the brain considers it “normal.”
However, the absence of mirroring is a foe signal and the brain will take notice
when two people are out of synchrony during personal interactions. e
person not being mirrored may not be able to speciﬁcally articulate why they
are uncomfortable, but this foe signal will trigger a defensive response, which
discourages attempts at friendship.
Isopraxism (mirroring) gestures
Mirroring takes practice. Fortunately, you can rehearse mirroring in any
professional or social setting. When you casually talk to a group of friends at
work or in a social setting, you will notice that the members of the group will
mirror one another. To practice th e mirroring technique, change your stance or
posture. Within a short period of time, other members of the group will
mirror your posture. e ﬁrst few times you do this, you may feel as though
everybody in the group knows what you are doing. I can assure you they will
not know. What you are experiencing is the spotlight eﬀect described later in
this chapter. Another way to practice isopraxism is to mirror random people
when you meet them. After a few sessions, you will master the mirroring
technique and will be able to use it as an additional tool in establishing
friendships.
THE INWARD LEAN
People tend to lean toward individuals they like and distance themselves from
people they don’t like. Occasionally during my FBI career, I was asked to
attend embassy parties and diplomatic functions. I spent most of my time
observing the other guests to determine which relationships were well
established, which relationships were developing, and which guests were
receptive to relationship building.
An inward lean is receptive to relationship building. Inward leaning between people conversing indicates a positive
relationship has already been established. Inward leaning in association with other friend signals such as smiles,
head nodding, head tilts, whispering, and touching indicates an even closer relationship between the parties
involved.
People tilt their heads slightly backward to increase distance from another
person, which signals that relationship building is not going well. e same
thing applies when individuals turn their torsos away from another person
during interaction. People will also reposition their feet away from unwanted
visitors. ese subtle, nonverbal cues can mean the diﬀerence between
acceptance and rejection.
I often use nonverbal signals to monitor the eﬀectiveness of my lectures.
Students who are interested in the material will lean forward in their seats, tilt
their heads to the right or the left, and periodically nod their heads in
