is kind of thing happens to me all the time. People do things for me. I
don’t ask for favors, not even a hint. What I have discovered is when you make
other people feel good about themselves (the Golden Rule of Friendship) you
not only get people to like you, there’s also a collateral beneﬁt; they want to
make you feel good as well. I see it every day. I experience it time after time.
Here’s another air travel experience to illustrate this “beneﬁt.” I was in
Moline, Illinois, when my ﬂight was canceled. is is not exactly a great place
to get stranded. People were ranting and swearing. e woman directly in front
of me in line was waving her arms and screaming at the ticket agent, who was
trying her best not to lose it. She said, “e next ﬂight I can put you on,
ma’am, is tomorrow morning.” Upon hearing that information, the woman
swore even louder and stomped oﬀ.
It was my turn. I walked up to the still-simmering agent and said, “Wow,
that lady was pretty intense.” (empathic statement)
“She was,” she agreed. “I didn’t like her.”
I replied, “Well, I couldn’t help but overhear there isn’t a ﬂight until
tomorrow morning.”
And she said, “No, there’s another ﬂight in an hour.”
I started to say something, but she interrupted, “I don’t like her. She waits
until tomorrow. I like you. You get on today.”
UTILIZING FRIENDSHIP TOOLS: THE SKY’S THE LIMIT
I have one last ﬂying story that should, without a doubt, conﬁrm that the
friendship tools do indeed work. I was on the last ﬂight out of town, with a
ninety-minute layover, so I decided this would be a great opportunity to
interview some airline personnel and get their thoughts about the relationship
between customer service and customer be havior.
ere was a single employee still working the ticket counter. I headed her
way, using friendship signals as I approached. I needed a “hook” that would
pique her curiosity. When she asked me where I was going I said I was going to
Chicago to ﬁnish up an investigation. She asked what I did for a living and I
said, “I work for the FBI.” at got her attention and she asked what kind of
FBI work I did.
“I train people,” I replied.
“Train people in what?” she asked.
“To be nice to people . . . to  get things they don’t deserve.” (curiosity hook)
She laughed. “Like what?”
“Like an upgrade.”
We were both grinning at this point. I said: “If I walked up to you and
asked for an upgrade, would you do it?”
“No,” she exclaimed. “People do that all the time and I say no.”
“So do you ever give upgrades?”
“Yeah, to people I like.”
Case closed.
Whether you’re in Afghanistan or Atlanta, the techniques in this book
work, alone or in combination. When you use them, you maximize your
chances for making friends, even with those individuals who start out seeing
you as an enemy. And, who knows, you just might get an upgrade in the
process.
