ME: So you think one night out is not enough to make up for the work you did while I was
gone. (empathic statement; reentering breaking the anger cycle)
Rejection of the presumptive statement typically indicates that the person
has not completely vented his or her anger. Reentering breaking the anger cycle
allows the person to vent any residual anger. Some people have deep-seated
anger issues that may never be resolved. In these cases, the best course of action
you could oﬀer is to agree to disagree or you could both agree not to bring the
sensitive topic up again. ese possible resolutions set boundaries for your
relationships, not abruptly end them.
e anger cycle can be used in virtually all situations when you are
confronted by angry people. e following exchange between a customs oﬃcer
and a foreign visitor illustrates the use of the anger cycle to resolve a dispute.
CUSTOMS OFFICER: Ma’am, you can’t bring dirt into this country.
VISITOR: It is sacred dirt from a holy place. I will not give it up!
CUSTOMS OFFICER: So, you don’t want to give up the dirt because it is special to you.
(empathic statement)
VISITOR: Of course, it’s special. It’s blessed ground. It keeps evil spirits away. It protects me
from illness. I will not give it up and you can’t make me! (venting)
CUSTOMS OFFICER: is dirt fends oﬀ evil spirits and keeps you healthy. (empathic
statement)
VISITOR: I haven’t been sick even once since I got the dirt. I really need it. (venting)
CUSTOMERS OFFICER: Staying healthy means a lot to you. (empathic statement)
VISITOR: Yes, it does. (a sigh accompanied by a shoulder drop)
CUSTOMS OFFICER: Let’s work together to come up with a solution to this problem.
(presumptive statement) Would you like that?” (e visitor cannot say “No” without
appearing unreasonable.)
VISITOR: Of course.
CUSTOMS OFFICER: e regulation states that you cannot bring dirt into the country
because the microbes in the dirt could infest crops. (provides an explanation) I’m sure you
don’t want to be responsible for making millions of people sick, do you? (presumptive
statement) (e visitor cannot say “Yes” without appearing unreasonable.)
CUSTOMS OFFICER: Give me the dirt and you will be able to begin your visit to the United
States.
VISITOR: If I have to, okay. (voluntary compliance)
REENTERING THE ANGER CYCLE
In the event the visitor remained angry and did not voluntarily give up the
dirt, the customs oﬃcer would reenter the anger cycle in an attempt to break
it. e following exchange demonstrates reentry into the cycle.
CUSTOMS OFFICER: Give me the dirt and you will be able to begin your visit to the United
States.
VISITOR: No, my dirt isn’t contaminated. I have to keep it.
CUSTOMS OFFICER: You are pretty passionate about keeping your dirt. (empathic statement)
VISITOR: I want my dirt! Can I, at least, keep a teaspoonful? (movement toward voluntary
compliance)
CUSTOMS OFFICER: You are trying to ﬁgure out a way to get at least some of your dirt into
the country. (empathic statement)
VISITOR: Yes, of course. Can I keep at least a teaspoon? at surely won’t hurt anything.
(movement toward voluntary compliance)
CUSTOMS OFFICER: e smallest amount of dirt can do great harm to the crops. (provides
an explanation) Give me the dirt and you will be able to begin your visit to the United States.
(presumptive statement)
VISITOR: All right. If I have to, I’ll give it to you. I really don’t want to do this. (voluntary
compliance)
In the event that reentering the anger cycle does not produce voluntary
compliance, the customs oﬃcer should develop two options and then allow the
angry person to choose one of the options. Giving angry people two options to
choose from creates the illusion that they’re in control. e following exchange
illustrates the “You choose” technique.
VISITOR: I refuse to give up my dirt.
CUSTOMS OFFICER: You seem pretty adamant about keeping your dirt. (empathic
statement) e regulation states that you can’t bring dirt into the country. You’re going to have
to make a decision. e ﬁrst option is to give up your dirt and enter the country. e second
option is to keep your dirt and not be allowed to enter the country. (presents two options) It’s
your decision. What happens from this point forward is up to you. Choose the option you
prefer. (creating the illusion that the visitor is in control)
VISITOR: I have no real choice because I want to enter the country. You can have the dirt.
(voluntary compliance)
CUSTOMS OFFICER: You made the right decision. Welcome to America.
In each of these scenarios, the oﬃcer maintained the illusion that the visitor
was in control of the situation, but in reality the oﬃcer directed the visitor one
step at a time toward voluntary compliance.
Some people feel they relinquish their authority when they use compliance
techniques that subtly inﬂuence rather than intimidate. Gaining voluntary
compliance through breaking the anger cycle not only enhances your authority
but also reduces the probability that the contact will go awry and the angry
person will just get madder and less compliant. By your breaking the anger
cycle, there is a good chance the angry person will go along with the decision
