further instructed him to set the marbles on the bar and thoughtfully examine
each one with the magnifying glass. is activity would serve as a curiosity
hook. I also told him to build good rapport with the bartender and servers
because they would become his ambassadors to the members in the
community. Because the bartender and servers had direct contact with Phillip,
other customers would naturally ask them who the new person was. When
they did, they would say nice things about Phillip, which in turn would form a
primacy ﬁlter through which the other customers would view Phillip. (Primacy
ﬁlters will be discussed in the next chapter.)
Several weeks later, Phillip telephoned me and reported that I was right.
e ﬁrst time he visited the bar he ordered a drink, laid out the marbles, and
examined them one by one with the magnifying glass. A few minutes after the
bartender served Phillip his drink, he asked him about his unusual activity .
Phillip told the bartender brieﬂy about his marble collection and noted the
diﬀerences in size, color, and texture of each marble. After several visits to the
bar, Phillip and the bartender became better acquainted.
e bartender liked Phillip and introduced him to several people who were
obviously interested in his quirky hobby. e marbles served as a conversation
starter and made the transition to other topics eﬀortless.
e Friendship Formula looks like magic, but it is not. It just mirrors the
way people normally form relationships. And knowing the basic elements of
friendship development makes building friendships easy.
HOW VLADIMIR WAS INFLUENCED BY THE FRIENDSHIP FORMULA
Remember that Vladimir had initially vowed to not speak to me. e ﬁrst
thing I did was to establish proximity. Every day I sat with him and read the
newspaper, not saying a word, virtually ignoring him. is silent activity
established proximity, but, more important, did not pose a threat. Once
Vladimir determined that I was not a threat, he became curious. Why does this
agent come each day? What is his purpose? Why doesn’t he say anything to
me? My daily visits and silent reading activity served as a curiosity hook.
Overcome with curiosity, Vladimir eventually broke his silence and made the
ﬁrst move to establish contact. Speaking with me was no longer my idea; it
became his. Vladimir took the initiative. Even then, I did not immediately
begin talking with him; instead, I reminded him that when we ﬁrst met, he
vowed never to talk. In addition to the Friendship Formula, this introduced
two psychological principles that will be discussed later in the book, “the
principle of scarcity” and the “principle of increased restraint increases drive.”
In simple terms, I did not readily make myself available to Vladimir, which
heightened his curiosity, causing an increase in his motivation to talk. Once
Vladimir opened his personal and psychological space to me, I was able to use
the rapport-building techniques discussed throughout this book to bring him
to the point where he willingly provided me with information.
To eﬀectively use the Friendship Formula, you have to keep in mind what
kind of relationship you are looking to establish and the time you will be
required to spend with your person of interest. Obviously, the formula will not
play a major role in getting someone to like you if you are only going to see
them once or sporadically. To illustrate: Say you’re in Cleveland, Ohio, for a
one-day conference and you meet this particularly attractive man or woman
(you choose which is appropriate) and want to spend the evening with him or
her. When you give the person a friend signal, it is not reciprocated; in fact,
the person goes “shields up.” At this point, you’re not going to get anywhere
with this individual; not tonight, anyway. But, according to the Friendship
Formula, if you end up moving to Cleveland, you might still be able to win
this person over using proximity, frequency, duration, and intensity to develop
a relationship.
THE FRIEND-FOE CONTINUUM
When two people meet each other for the ﬁrst time (assuming neither person
knows anything about the other person), they are strangers. Imagine yourself
walking down the street in a town where you don’t know anybody and people
are moving around you as they head toward their destinations. Or think of
yourself in a bar or restaurant or other public building where you are among
dozens of people unfamiliar to you. In these cases, you are in the “stranger”
