EXPOSING CATPHISH
To prevent yourself from being hooked by a catphish, force him or her into the
visual world, where you can use your well-honed knowledge of nonverbal
signals to verify if the person matches up with their online persona and if the
relationship looks as good “in the light of day” as it did on a computer screen.
During the early stages of an Internet relationship, you must realize that the
lack of nonverbal cues puts you at a disadvantage. Establish competing
hypotheses to prevent the relationship from developing too fast.
Always assume that you are the victim of a catphish until visual evidence
proves otherwise. Insist on a face-to-face meeting as soon as possible. is
meeting should take place in a well-populated, public area to reduce the
possibility of personal danger. Also, to make the meeting more comfortable for
both Internet users, a casual, relatively short ﬁrst face-to-face meeting is
recommended; a coﬀee shop rendezvous or lunch date might be best.
In the event a face-to-face meeting is not practical, insist on a visual
meeting on Skype or similar service. An Internet partner who makes excuses to
avoid a face-to-face meeting, or constantly makes excuses as to why a visual
meeting on the Internet is not possible, is sending a strong signal that
something is amiss. At this point, you should immediately break oﬀ your
Internet relationship. To do otherwise puts you in peril, possibly signiﬁcant
peril.
Demanding a visual meeting early in the relationship is a simple yet
eﬀective technique to avoid being hooked by a catphish. Visual meetings allow
you to evaluate nonverbal cues to assess the veracity of your Internet partner.
Visual contact also prevents the development of idealized characteristics to an
unknown person. Developing competing hypotheses reduces the eﬀect of truth
bias. e need to reveal sensitive, personal information is reduced in face-to-
face encounters, thus preventing the relationships from developing too quickly.
Slowing the development of the relationship reduces your emotional
investment, thus minimizing the emotional cost of breaking oﬀ the
relationship.
In genuine relationships, people are eager to communicate visually,
especially early in a relationship. People feel more comfortable in visual
relationships because they can use the social skills they have come to rely on to
evaluate others more accurately. Visual meetings expose catphish and level the
Internet relationship playing ﬁeld.
A NEW GENERATION: TURN ON, TUNE IN, AND TAKE PRECAUTIONS
ere is simply no denying that the advent of person-to-person online
communication has dramatically altered the landscape of seeking friends and
building relationships. As online interaction continues to grow in popularity it
will have an even greater impact on the way people form relationships in the
years to come.
By being aware of the Internet dangers mentioned above, and using the
techniques I recommend to minimize them, meaningful Internet relationships
are possible. In fact, for reasons listed at the beginning of this chapter, they
might be the preferred method for connecting with people in the initial stage
of relationship building.
Used with appropriate caution and common sense, the Internet is another
tool in your friendship toolbox for ﬁnding and developing friendships for a
moment or a lifetime. Conversely, if you use the tool carelessly, with a
disregard for what is inputted and downloaded, it can lead to disappointment
and potential personal disasters. In the ﬁnal analysis, how you use the digital
universe will determine its ultimate value, good or bad, in shaping the quality
of your life and your relationships.
