used during person-to-person interactions. Judicious use of humor can reduce
anxiety and establish a relaxed mood that helps a relationship to develop more
rapidly. A slightly risqué joke can help to escalate the level of intimacy in a
ﬂirtatious conversation. Of course, as is the case with any verbal
communication, the speaker must be sure that the words, or, in this case, the
humor used, is appropriate and will not be perceived as oﬀensive by the
listener.
e added beneﬁt to using humor is that laughing causes a release of
endorphins, which makes you feel good about yourself, and, according to the
Golden Rule of Friendship, if you make people feel good about themselves,
they will like you. A woman who likes a particular man will laugh at his jokes,
no matter how lame, more often and with more gusto than she will laugh at
jokes told by a man in whom she has little romantic interest. is
phenomenon further supports the Golden Rule of Friendship.
THE LAW OF FAMILIARITY
e more we meet and interact with people, the more likely we are to become
friends. Behavioral scientist Leon Festinger and two colleagues studied
relationships in a small two-story apartment building. ey found that
neighbors were most likely to be friends. e residents who were least likely to
be friends were on separate ﬂoors. ose residents near ground-ﬂoor staircases
and mailboxes had friends on both ﬂoors.
e Law of Familiarity points to the importance of proximity
(a component of the Friendship Formula) in aﬀecting relationships. People
who share the same physical space are more likely to be attracted to one
another. Proximity predisposes one person to like another person, even before
they are formally introduced. Classroom seating charts can be good predictors
of which students will become attracted to one another. In my class, I’ve
observed that students who sit in the vicinity of each other are more likely to
become friends as opposed to students who sit on opposite sides of the
classroom. Likewise, in professional settings, romances and friendships can be
predicted based on who sits next to whom.
e old adage “Absence makes the heart grow fonder” is not necessarily
true. e farther apart an engaged couple live from one another, the greater the
probability their engagement will not survive.
THE LAW OF ASSOCIATION
When people associate in large groups, people on the outside of the group tend
to assess individual members of the group based on their overall impression of
the total group. So, when a less attractive individual wants to be seen as more
attractive, he or she should associate with a group of attractive people.
Conversely, an attractive person may be viewed as less attractive if he or she is
in the company of unattractive people.
It seems that adult life doesn’t change all that much from high school. If
you want to be “popular,” you still need to hang out with the popular people.
In a business situation this means always try to “friend up,” not down. Who
you associate with matters. If you want to be seen as successful, you need to
hang out with successful people.
e Law of Association works diﬀerently when, instead of looking at how
one person’s attractiveness is aﬀected by being in a large group, the focus is on
how people are compared and perceived when they are with just one or two
others. In these circumstances, if a person wants to appear as more attractive,
he or she should be seen in the company of a less attractive individual. is
phenomenon helps explain the behavior of prospective buyers when they visit
model homes. ey leave their own homes, which are satisfactory in the
morning. After spending all day looking at model homes, they return to what
they now perceive as an unattractive home. eir house becomes less attractive
because they compare it with the more elegant models they recently viewed.
THE LAW OF SELF-ESTEEM
People like to associate with individuals who display high levels of self-esteem.
us, such individuals have an easier time attracting others and making
friends. Individuals with high levels of self-esteem are also self-conﬁdent and
comfortable with being the center of attention. ey are also comfortable with
