Beyond the dating landscape, I found third-party compliments to be very
eﬀective in the workplace. A case in point: Money to fund operations within
the FBI is competitive; consequently, not every proposal gets funded. To
improve the probability that my proposals would be approved I would employ
the third-party-compliment strategy.
Several weeks before my proposal was scheduled to be reviewed by the
newly appointed assistant director, I sought out the most notorious gossip in
the oﬃce and casually mentioned to him that it was about time our ﬁeld oﬃce
got an assistant director who ﬁnally knew what he was doing. I also
commented that the new assistant director was a clever man with keen insights
into operational strategies. For gossips, the coin of the realm is information. In
their eyes, they gain value by spreading information they hear to the
individuals who would have interest in hearing it. Sure enough, the boss soon
heard of my comments “through the grapevine.” e assistant director was
more likely to accept this compliment as sincere from a third-party individual
than directly from me. Besides, I did not have access to the assistant director, as
I was in the ﬁeld at the time.
When the assistant director reviewed my proposals, he was pre disposed to
look at them more favorably because of his knowledge of how I viewed him. I
had made him feel good about himself, a fulﬁllment of the Golden Rule of
Friendship, and I had done it in a way that didn’t arouse his suspicions. ird-
party compliments are within normal behavioral parameters and pass a person’s
“territory scan” without arousing an alert. So I had nothing to lose. If my
strategy failed, the downside risk was zero, because I would have lost the
funding anyway. If the technique worked, the upside is successfully achieving
what I wanted. As it tu rned out, most of my proposals were funded.
THIRD PARTY AND THE “PRIMACY EFFECT”
Words cannot change reality, but they can change how people perceive reality.
Words create ﬁlters through which people view the world around them. A
single word can make the diﬀerence between liking and disliking a person.
Consider this example: Your friend Calvin tells you about your new
neighbor, Bill, whom you are meeting for the ﬁrst time. Calvin says, “Your new
neighbor, Bill, is not very trustworthy; in fact, when you shake hands, check
your ﬁngers to make sure he hasn’t taken any.” How are you going to view Bill
when you ﬁrst are introduced? e problem is you have already been
encouraged to prejudge him as untrustworthy through what behavioral
scientists refer to as the “primacy eﬀect.” If a friend describes the person you
are about to meet for the ﬁrst time as untrustworthy, you will be predisposed
to view that person as untrustworthy, regardless of the person’s actual level of
trustworthiness. ereafter, you will tend to view everything that person says
or does as untrustworthy.
Conversely, say your friend Calvin tells you that your new neighbor, Bill, “is
very friendly, gregarious, and has a great sense of humor . . . you’re going to
love him.” How are you going to view Bill now? You will likely see Bill as
friendly, regardless of his degree of friendliness.
Overcoming negative or positive perceptions you might have toward a
speciﬁc individual because of what you were told by someone else (particularly
if you respect and/or like that person) is diﬃcult, but not impossible to
achieve. e more times you meet the “untrustworthy” Bill and do not
experience instances of untrustworthiness, the more likely you are to see him as
trustworthy, thus overcoming the original negativity created by the primacy
eﬀect. However, you are less likely to give a person labeled “untrustworthy” a
chance to prove the label wrong because your desire to see the person a second
time will be reduced.
If you meet the “friendly” Bill several times and do not experience
friendliness, then you will tend to excuse away the unfriendly behavior. Such
excuses might include “He must be having a bad day” or “I must have caught
him at a bad time.” An unfriendly person initially described as friendly gains
an advantage from the primacy eﬀect because people tend to allow the
unfriendly person multiple opportunities to demonstrate friendliness despite
numerous displays of unfriendly behavior.
It is precisely because the primacy eﬀect can be so powerful that we can use
it as one of our tools for shaping friendships or getting people to see us as we
want to be seen. What you are doing with the primacy eﬀect is sending a
message that will predispose somebody to see someone else in a way that you
want them to be perceived.
