expressions of displeasure or anxiety. Negative reactions indicate that the
person will be unlikely to see you as a potential friend.
Unless the individual is exceptionally shy and reserved, negative reactions to
a simple arm touch probably indicate dislike or distrust. With the exception of
a traditional handshake, touching another person’s hand is more personal than
touching his or her arm. Hand touching serves as a barometer for romantic
relationships. Movies often focus on hand touching to signal that a
relationship is cold, growing, or in full bloom. If you touch a person’s hand
and they pull away, even slightly, the person being touched is not yet ready to
intensify the relationship. Pulling away does not necessarily signal rejection. It
means that you will have to build more rapport with your person of interest
before advancing the relationship. Touch acceptance signals that the person is
ready for hand holding, a more intense form of touching. Interlocking of the
ﬁngers during hand holding is the most intimate form of hand holding. A risk-
free way to measure the strength of a new relationship is to “accidentally”
touch or brush against the hand of your person of interest. Most people will
tolerate an accidental touch, even if they don’t like the person touching them,
but they will unconsciously send nonverbal signals indicating the acceptance or
rejection of the touch. Watch for these nonverbal displays and proceed
accordingly.
ISOPRAXISM (MIRRORING THE BEHAVIOR OF ANOTHER PERSON)
Isopraxism is the fancy term for “mirroring,” a nonverbal practice that can be
used to make friendship development easier and more eﬀective. Mirroring
creates a favorable impression in the mind of the person you are mirroring.
When you ﬁrst meet someone and want to gain their friendship, make a
conscious eﬀort to mirror their body language. If they stand with their arms
crossed, you stand with your arms crossed. If they sit with their legs crossed,
you sit with your legs crossed. In some situations, mirroring is impractical. A
woman who is wearing a short dress or skirt cannot be expected to assume an
open leg cross to mirror the person she is talking with. In this instance, cross
matching will suﬃce. Instead of an open leg cross, a woman could assume a
closed leg cross at the ankles or knees.
e other person will not consciously notice your mirroring behavior
because it falls within the human baseline and the brain considers it “normal.”
However, the absence of mirroring is a foe signal and the brain will take notice
when two people are out of synchrony during personal interactions. e
person not being mirrored may not be able to speciﬁcally articulate why they
are uncomfortable, but this foe signal will trigger a defensive response, which
discourages attempts at friendship.
Isopraxism (mirroring) gestures
Mirroring takes practice. Fortunately, you can rehearse mirroring in any
professional or social setting. When you casually talk to a group of friends at
work or in a social setting, you will notice that the members of the group will
mirror one another. To practice th e mirroring technique, change your stance or
posture. Within a short period of time, other members of the group will
mirror your posture. e ﬁrst few times you do this, you may feel as though
everybody in the group knows what you are doing. I can assure you they will
not know. What you are experiencing is the spotlight eﬀect described later in
this chapter. Another way to practice isopraxism is to mirror random people
when you meet them. After a few sessions, you will master the mirroring
technique and will be able to use it as an additional tool in establishing
friendships.
