If every time you meet a person you make them feel good about themselves,
he or she will seek out every opportunity to see you again to experience those
same good feelings. e stumbling block many of my fellow agents confronted
in achieving this objective is the same one we all encounter: our own ego.
People’s egos get in the way of practicing the Golden Rule of Friendship. Most
people think the world revolves around them and they should be the center of
attention. But if you want to appear friendly and attractive to others, you must
forgo your ego and pay attention to the other person and his or her particular
needs and circumstances. Other people will like you when you make them (not
you) the focus of attention.
ink about it: It is unfortunate that we seldom use this powerful rule for
making ourselves more attractive to others while, at the same time, making
those individuals feel better about themselves. We are too busy focusing on
ourselves and not on the people we meet. We put our wants and needs before
the wants and needs of others. e irony of all this is that other people will be
eager to fulﬁll your wants and needs if they like you.
TECHNIQUES TO MAKE PEOPLE FEEL GOOD ABOUT THEMSELVES:
EMPATHIC STATEMENTS
Empathic statements keep the focus of the conversation on the person you are
talking with rather than on yourself. ey are one of the most eﬀective ways to
make people feel good about themselves. Keeping the focus on the other
person is diﬃcult because we are, by nature, ego centric and think the world
revolves around us. Nevertheless, if every time you talk to people they feel
good about themselves, you will have successfully achieved the objective of the
Golden Rule of Friendship and people will like you as a result.
Empathic statements such as “You look like you are having a bad day” or
“You look happy today” let people know that someone is listening to them and
cares to some degree about their well-being. is kind of attention makes us
feel good about ourselves and, more important, predisposes us to like the
person who gave us the attention.
Empathic statements also close the discourse cycle. When a person says
something, they want feedback to know if their message was received and
understood. Mirroring back what a person says using parallel language closes
the communication circle. People feel good about themselves when they
successfully communicate a message.
Constructing empathic statements requires you to carefully listen to the
other person. Concentrated listening demonstrates that you are really
interested in the other person and understand what they are  saying.
e basic formula for constructing empathic statements is “So you . . .”
ere are many ways to form empathic statements but this basic formula gets
you in the habit of keeping the focus of the conversation on the other person
and away from you. Simple empathic statements might include “So you like
the way things are going today,” or “So you are having a good day.” We
naturally tend to say something to the eﬀect of “I understand how you feel.”
e other person then automatically thinks, No, you don’t know how I feel
because you are not me. e basic “So you . . .” formula ensures that the focus of
the conversation remains on the other person. For example, you get on an
elevator and see a person who is smiling and looks happy. You can naturally
say, “So, things are going your way today,” mirroring back their physical
nonverbal cues.
When using empathic statements to achieve the objective of the Golden
Rule of Friendship, avoid repeating back word for word what the person said.
Since people rarely do this, when it occurs the repetition is processed by the
brain of the listener as abnormal behavior and causes a defensive reaction. is
is the exact opposite eﬀect of what you are trying to achieve by using empathic
statements. Parroting another person’s statement can also sound patronizing
and condescending. Don’t do it!
Empathic statements keep the focus of the conversation on the other person
and make them feel good about themselves. And using empathic statements is
a simple yet eﬀective technique that will have people seeking you out to be
their friend, because every time they converse with you, you make them feel
good about themselves. And, best of all, people will not know you are using
this technique, because they naturally think they deserve the attention and will
not see your actions as being out of the ordinary (it will pass their territory
scan without arousing any attention). Once you have mastered constructing
