backward. A person who is processing information on the verbal and
nonverbal levels will pick up these signals and can often save the day by asking
if they said something oﬀensive and, if so, assuring the listener that it certainly
wasn’t their intention to do so. A further examination of what the oﬀending
word means to both parties can usually put any bad feelings to rest and the
conversation can restart on a positive note. e hazard of word mines is that
people don’t know what emotional meanings others attach to otherwise
innocuous words.
IS IT SOMETHING I SAID?
A friend was lecturing about interviewing techniques to a group of seminar
participants. At one point he said, “People need to listen more than they talk.
e proof of this is the Lord gave you two ears and one mouth, so you should
listen twice as much as you speak.”
During the lunch break, the conference host walked into the banquet room
and informed my friend that a charge had been ﬁled against him by the Equal
Employment Opportunity Commission. She had come to investigate exactly
what happened. My friend was dumbfounded. He had no idea who would ﬁle
such a complaint and why they would do it.
It turned out that one of the attendees had a son who was born with only
one ear, and when my friend made the remark about “two ears and one
mouth,” this father thought my friend was making fun of his child.
Once my friend was told of the circumstances surrounding the complaint,
he explained to the host that his comment was a truism that had been around
for decades and when he said it, he in no way meant it as a slight against
anyone.
e host wasn’t moved. “If the father is oﬀended,” she said, “it’s his
perspective of what happened we need to address, whether you think it is
oﬀensive or not.”
My friend thought the entire situation was ludicrous. He didn’t see that he
had done anything wrong and certainly didn’t want to apologize to the father
for what he saw as perfectly acceptable language.
e host would have none of it. “If you want to keep this consulting job,
you need to apologize to the father.”
Faced with that ultimatum, my friend decided discretion was the better part
of valor and oﬀered his apology to the distraught father.
WHEN EVERYTHING ISN’T BLACK-AND-WHITE
e classroom seems to provide a particularly conducive environment for word
mines to rattle an unsuspecting lecturer. Two reasons for this is the diversity of
today’s student body and the larger number of enrollees in any particular
course. When it comes to racial issues, teachers must tiptoe carefully through
their lectures, being careful not to set oﬀ a word mine by using words or
phrases that mean diﬀerent things to diﬀerent students. In one of my classes, I
couldn’t get my laptop to boot up. Every time I switched it on all I got was a
black screen. So I asked my students, “Does anyone here know how to make
this thing work?” One student nodded, walked over to the laptop, made a few
adjustments to the machine, and handed it back to me. I said, “Well, the
screen is white and white is better than black at least.”
A black student in the class took immediate oﬀense at my comment. “I
heard you say ‘white is better than black,’ ” he declared. “at’s a racist
remark.”
I had no intention of making a racial slur. Race never crossed my mind. I
was anxious to get my laptop functional so I could present my lecture. My
comment referred to how my laptop was operating. A black screen indicated
the laptop was not booting up. A white screen indicated that the laptop was
booting up. In other words, a laptop that is booting up is better than a laptop
that is not booting up. Yet, my student heard the comment from a diﬀerent
perspective and it triggered a deep emotional response. Such is the nature and
danger of word mines.
Another teacher related another good example of this to me. She teaches a
course in international management, which means a large number of students
from other countries are in attendance. At the beginning of one class, about
halfway through the semester, a male American student walked up to another
male student and greeted him by saying, “How’s it going, dawg?!” e
