When they arrived at their rendezvous point, Sana and Adnan met their
online lovers for the ﬁrst time. It was not love at ﬁrst sight. It turned out that
Sana and Adnan had unknowingly been carrying on their online aﬀair with
each other!
One might best leave it to ethicists and lawyers to decide if Sana and Adnan
were being unfaithful, as it is diﬃcult to imagine committing adultery with
your own spouse; however, “Sweetie” and “Prince of Joy” were not pleased and,
at last report, were accusing each other of being unfaithful and ﬁling for
divorce.
What do all these stories demonstrate?
1. Relationships developed over the Internet can be as powerful as those developed in face-to-face
interactions, sometimes more so.
2. On the Internet, things are not always as they appear.
3. If a world-class physicist can be duped over the Internet, you probably can be, too.
4. ere are creepy, mean, sick people populating the Internet just as they do in the real world.
5. Scams involving relationships on the Internet are more common than most of us imagine.
ey have become so widespread, in fact, that a documentary ﬁlm, MTV reality series, and
feature ﬁlm have been based on the problem. A word has even been coined, catﬁsh, which, as
Internet attorney Parry Aftab says, refers to “anybody who pretends to be someone who they’re
not on social media. It’s done all the time.” I’ve taken that expression one step further with
“catphish” to also include the hackers who wish to steal your identity.
6. Because of the “cloak of secrecy” provided by the Internet, people will say things in cyberspace
they would never say in a personal interaction.
7. On the Internet, as in real life, if it’s too good to be true, it probably is! Social networks can be
hazardous. No communication posted to the Internet can be guaranteed to remain private. You
must assume that your posts are permanent and public.
8. As in face-to-face communications, pretending to be someone you are not often leads to
unpleasant outcomes.
9. ere are things you can do to navigate the Internet more safely and eﬀectively. Some
suggestions are provided in the following pages. ese suggestions are not only relevant for
individuals seeking love on the Internet; they will be helpful for anyone looking for friends in
cyberspace.
TESTING FOR VERACITY ONLINE AND OFFLINE
Letting our teenagers roam freely on the Internet, especially my daughter, was
a scary proposition for my wife and me. So I taught them some techniques I
used on suspects to determine their veracity. I did this to help protect them
from both online and real-world predators. I oﬀer these techniques to you for
the same reason, to help you guard against deceptive on- and oﬄine
communications. e results of these seeming innocuous veracity tests are not
absolute proof of deception but they do provide you with strong indicators
that someone might be lying or, at least, stretching the truth beyond acceptable
limits.
THE WELL . . . TECHNIQUE
When you ask someone a direct yes-or-no question and they begin their
answer with the “Well,” there is a high probability of deception. It indicates
that the person answering the question is about to give you an answer that they
know you are not expecting. e following exchanges will clarify the “Well”
technique.
DAD: Did you ﬁnish your homework?
DAUGHTER: Well . . .
DAD: Go to your room and ﬁnish your homework.
DAUGHTER: How did you know I didn’t do my homework?
DAD: I’m a dad. I know these things.
e dad didn’t need to wait for his daughter to ﬁnish her answer because he
knew by her use of “Well” in response to his direct question that she was about
to give him an answer she knew he was not expecting. e daughter knew her
dad was expecting a yes answer to the question “Did you do your homework?”
In another example, I interviewed a person who I thought witnessed a
murder. e person was in proximity to the crime scene, but he denied seeing
the shooting. After giving me some evasive answers, I decided to test his
veracity by asking him a direct yes-or-no question.
ME: Did you see what happened?
WITNESS: Well . . . from where I was it was hard to see much of anything. It was dark and it all
happened so fast.
I asked the witness a direct question to which he knew I expected a yes
answer. Since he began his response with “Well,” I knew he was about to give
me an answer other than yes. I let the witness ﬁnish his response so as not to
alert him to the technique.
e “Well” technique only works with direct yes-or-no questions.
Beginning a response with “Well” in answer to an open-ended question such as
