“It is regrettable,” I consoled; “but you have no chance for a legitimate,
even a morganatic alliance with the young Grand Duke. I consider their
entire attitude toward you utterly unfair. In view of your understanding
with him, you are most certainly entitled to adequate recompense from
his house. If you went into court you could obtain this on grounds of
breach of promise, but I can understand your feelings. Such a step would
only cast odium upon an old and noble family such as yours.”
at seemed to her liking.
“But what can I do?” she said.
“In view of my friendship for you,” I told her, “I would consider it an
honor if you would permit me to act on your behalf. I think I can
negotiate with the young Grand Duke’s uncle and I promise that he will
regard the matter in a fair light. I appreciate the extreme delicacy of the
situation and you must observe the necessity of a man handling this
aﬀair.”
She shook her head and tapped the letters nervously.
“No. It is intolerable,” she said. “Not to be thought of.”
I saw that I had to make it stronger. I thereupon invented the most
ingenious lie it has ever been given me to tell. In about ﬁve minutes I had
painted the young Grand Duke in such colors that the adventures of Don
Juan were saintly compared to the escapades of his ducal highness.
“Why consider it yourself,” I said. “He was to be over here with you
during the season. He has not come. You told me yourself that he has not
even answered your letters. Well that’s all there is to it. Your ladyship, he
and his house deserve any punishment that you can visit upon them.”
e idea of punishment appealed where the other had failed. e
outraged pride of a woman, especially an Englishwoman, is a terrible
thing. Soon after that I made haste to take my leave. At my quarters I
wrote two letters to myself and signed the Grand Duke’s name to them.
In these I oﬀered to pay her ladyship’s debts. ey were addressed to me
and after allowing a reasonable time to elapse, I again went out to Mayfair
and read them to her. She was now cold and hard and gave me full
permission to go ahead and make any arrangements I deemed advisable. I
thereupon went to the Grand Duke’s bank in London and notiﬁed them
that I must have 15,000 pounds ($75,000) . In four days I had the money.
e rest of the transaction was commonplace. She handed over all the
letters and documents and I gave her the 15,000 pounds. I know today
that her ladyship travels extensively in a very comfortable manner on the
yearly appanage allowed her by the old Grand Duke. I do not know
whether she still goes to Carlton Terrace to eat strawberries, but I ﬂatter
myself that her present good fortune is partially due to the fact that she
once went there.
HOW DR. GRAVES ACCOMPLISHED HIS MISSION
It is truly remarkable, when reading Dr. Graves’s diary, to realize this man was
a full century ahead of his time in using behavioral analysis and psychological
techniques to achieve his objective. If you take the time to reread the portion
of Chapter 1 detailing how the Friendship Formula was used to entice
“Seagull” to betray his country and become a spy for the United States, you
will be amazed at the parallels between the strategies employed by the FBI and
Dr. Graves in their work. Consider them:
1. In both cases, recruiting their targets was a well-choreographed plan that was executed over an
extended period of time. Both agents used the techniques presented in this book to predispose
their targets to like them prior to their ﬁrst meetings.
2. Dr. Graves, like the FBI agent Charles, used the Friendship Formula to establish a relationship
with the English lady. First they established proximity with their targets followed by an increase
in frequency and duration, and gradually introduced intensity, curiosity hooks, and
increasingly more intense nonverbal cues.
3. In both cases, the principle of proximity was used to establish nonthreatening contact between
the agent and the target (Chapter 1). In Seagull’s case, the FBI agent took pains to place
himself in public places where Seagull walked and would be aware of his presence. In Dr.
Graves’s case, he did the same by establishing proximity with his target on the riding trails and
seating himself at a table close to the one where his target routinely sat in the restaurant.
4. In both cases, the principles of frequency and duration were also utilized. With Seagull that
involved the FBI agent positioning himself on Seagull’s shopping route in a manner that
increased the number of instances (frequency), where the foreign diplomat saw him and
adding duration by following Seagull into the grocery store, extending the contact time
between the two men. With the English Lady, Dr. Graves increased frequency by the number
of times he passed the woman on the riding trails and saw her in the restaurant. Dr. Graves
even pointed out the power of frequency when he wrote, “I employed the theory of the
subconscious attraction of an oft seen though unknown face.” To achieve duration, he
extended contact time by being around the woman at additional public places, like the theater
