Seagull would go “shields up” and avoid him completely. Instead, he was
instructed to orchestrate his approach, using behavioral strategies designed to
establish friendships. e ﬁrst step was to get Seagull to like Charles before
they exchanged a single word. e second step was to use the appropriate
verbal prompts to translate that goodwill into a lasting friendship.
e preparation for the critica l ﬁrst encounter with Seagull started many
months before the actual meeting took place. Surveillance had determined that
Seagull routinely left his embassy compound once a week and walked two
blocks to the corner grocery store to shop. Armed with this information,
Charles was instructed to station himself at various locations along Seagull’s
route to the store. He was warned never to approach Seagull or threaten him in
any way; instead he was to simply “be there” so Seagull could see him.
As a trained intelligence oﬃcer, it was not long before Seagull took notice of
the FBI agent, who, by the way, made no eﬀort to conceal his identity. Because
Charles made no move to intercept or speak with his target, Seagull did not
feel threatened and became accustomed to seeing the American on his trips to
the store.
After several weeks of being in the same vicinity together, Seagull made eye
contact with the American operative. Charles nodded his head, acknowledging
Seagull’s presence, but showed no further interest in him.
More weeks passed and, as they did, Charles increased his nonverbal
interaction with Seagull by increasing his eye contact, raising his eyebrows,
tilting his head, and jutting out his chin, which are all nonverbal signs that
scientists have discovered are interpreted by the human brain as “friend
signals.”
Two months elapsed before Charles made his next move. He followed
Seagull into the grocery store he routinely visited, but kept his distance from
the foreign diplomat. With each new trip to the store, Charles continued to
enter the grocery as well, still maintaining space between himself and Seagull
but increasing the number of times he passed the diplomat in the aisles and
increasing the duration of visual contact with him. He noted that Seagull
bought a can of peas on each of his shopping excursions. With this new
information, Charles waited a few additional weeks and then, on one occasion,
followed Seagull into the store as he usually did, but this time to introduce
himself to Seagull. As the foreign diplomat reached for a can of peas, Charles
reached for the can next to it, turned to Seagull, and said, “Hi, my name is
Charles and I’m a Special Agent with the FBI.” Seagull smiled and said, “I
thought so.” From that ﬁrst innocuous meeting, Charles and Seagull developed
a close friendship. Seagull eventually agreed to assist his new FBI friend by
regularly providing him with classiﬁed information.
A casual observer, watching the many months’ wooing of Seagull, might
wonder why it took so long for the ﬁrst meeting to take place. It was not by
accident. In fact, the entire Seagull recruitment strategy was a carefully
choreographed psychological operation designed to establish a bond of
friendship between two men who would, under normal circumstances, never
contemplate such a relationship.
As a member of the FBI’s Behavioral Analysis Program, I was assigned,
along with my colleagues, the task of orchestrating the recruitment scenario for
Seagull. Our objective was to get Seagull comfortable enough with Charles,
our FBI operative, so that a ﬁrst meeting could take place and, hopefully,
would be followed by future meetings if Charles could make a good impression
on Seagull. Our task was made more diﬃcult because Seagull was a highly
trained intelligence oﬃcer who would be constantly on the alert for any person
who might arouse his suspicion, and which would result in his avoidance of
that individual at all costs.
For Charles to have a successful face-to-face ﬁrst meeting with Seagull, the
foreign operative would have to be psychologically comfortable with his
American counterpart. And for that to happen, Charles would have to take
speciﬁc steps, which, it turned out, he successfully achieved. e steps Charles
was required to follow in winning Seagull over are the same ones you must
take if you want to develop either short- or long-term friendships.
Using the Seagull case as a backdrop, let’s examine the steps Charles
successfully completed to recruit his target using the Friendship Formula.
THE FRIENDSHIP FORMULA
e Friendship Formula consists of the four basic building blocks: proximity,
frequency, duration, and intensity. ese four elements can be expressed using
