e next time someone thanks you for something, don’t say, “You’re welcome.”
Instead, say, “I know you’d do the same thing for me.” is response invokes
reciprocity. e other person is now predisposed to help you when you ask
them for a favor.
THE LAW OF SELF-DISCLOSURE
Reciprocity is also linked with openness in communication. Individuals who
disclose more personal information with other people are more likely to receive
a similar level of personal information in return. is phenomenon is further
enhanced if the people who are communicating have shared interests.
Self-disclosure promotes attraction. People feel a sense of closeness to others
who reveal their vulnerabilities, innermost thoughts, and facts about
themselves. e sense of closeness increases if the disclosures are emotional
rather than factual. is is partly due to the intensity of such disclosures,
which positively aﬀects the likability of the person making them.
Disclosures that are too general reduce the sense of openness, thus reducing
the feeling of closeness and likability. Disclosures that are too intimate often
highlight character and personality ﬂaws of the person, thus decreasing
likability. People who make intimate disclosures too early in a relationship are
often perceived as insecure, which further decreases likability. us, if you are
meeting someone who you would like to have as a long-term friend or
signiﬁcant other, you should be careful about making your most intimate
disclosures in the early stages of the relationship.
Self-disclosure is a two-step process. First, a person has to make a self-
disclosure that is neither too general nor too intimate. Second, the self-
disclosure must be received with empathy, caring, and respect. A negative
response made to a genuine self-disclosure can instantly terminate a
relationship.
Self-disclosures are often reciprocal. When one person makes self-
disclosures, the listener is more likely to reciprocate by making similar ones.
e exchange of personal information creates a sense of intimacy in
relationships. A relationship in which one person makes personal self-
disclosures while the other person continues to make superﬁcial disclosures is
not progressing and is likely to end.
WANT TO INCREASE THE LONGEVITY OF YOUR RELATIONSHIP?
Use the Hansel and Gretel approach. Hansel and Gretel, in the classic fairy
tale, set oﬀ into the woods, and to ensure that they can ﬁnd their way back,
they leave a trail of bread crumbs along the way. I recommend you use the
“bread crumb” approach to distributing information about yourself.
Relationships tend to wane over time. To increase the longevity of these
liaisons, release self-disclosures over an extended period of time.
Once somebody ﬁnds a person whom they can trust, they are often
tempted to open the emotional ﬂoodgates—telling too much too quickly—
overwhelming their partner in the process. Disclosures should be made over a
long period of time to ensure that the relationship slowly increases in intensity
and closeness. A steady trickle of information, like Hansel and Gretel’s bread
crumbs dropped one piece at a time, increases the longevity of the relationship
because each partner continually feels the closeness that comes with a steady
stream of self-disclosures.
Mutual self-disclosures create trust. People who make personal disclosures
become vulnerable to the person to whom the disclosures are made. Mutual
self-disclosures create a safety zone because each person has exposed their
vulnerabilities and tends to protect all the disclosures to avoid mutual
embarrassment resulting from a breach of trust.
Social network users tend to rely more on self-disclosures to create a sense
of closeness because they do not receive verbal and nonverbal cues that would
be otherwise exchanged in face-to-face communications. e veracity of
information exchanged online is suspect, thus forcing individuals online to
spend more time verifying information about each other. Once veracity has
been established, the lack of a physical presence increases the probability of
more intimate disclosures online, which in turn leads to the illusion of a closer
relationship.
THE LAW OF PERSONAL ATTRACTIVENESS
