“Look,” I said, in a soft voice that would be diﬃcult for other passengers to
hear, “the endgame is you’re getting oﬀ this plane. When the captain says
you’re getting oﬀ, you’re getting oﬀ. Now, you have a choice. Either you can
walk oﬀ and keep your dignity, voice your complaints once you’re in the
terminal, and complete your trip to Dallas on a later ﬂight . . . or I’m going to
arrest you, put you in handcuﬀs, and forcibly take you oﬀ the plane. en
you’re going to go to jail, have to bail yourself out, and come back here for a
trial, where you might be sentenced to prison. So,” I whispered to him, “sir, the
choice is yours. I’ll allow you to make this decision. Take a few seconds to
think about it. W hat do you want to do?”
It only took a moment for the passenger to say, “I think I’ll just get oﬀ,
make my complaint, and get on another plane.”
I said, “I think that’s a very intelligent decision. Here, I’ll be glad to walk
you oﬀ.”
After I had accompanied the man to the terminal and returned to my seat,
the ﬂight attendant who had spoken to me earlier came up and wanted to
know how I had managed to end such an ugly confrontation so peacefully. I
told her I had given the passenger the opportunity to make a choice on his
own.
I gave him the opportunity to feel he had some control in the  situation,
that he was free to choose his fate. And, most important, I provided him with
a face-saving way to exit th e aircraft with a minimum of embarrassment.
FOOD FOR THOUGHT
Giving someone the feeling they have some control over a situation can work wonders, even with children. In
fact, parents can use this approach to help their kids make decisions, especially when they are younger.
Children, like adults, want to feel as though they are in control of their lives. The illusion of control can be
conveyed if parents give their kids an opportunity to choose their destiny. This can be accomplished without
losing parental authority. For example, you are taking your son out to lunch. You have already made up your
mind that you are either going to McDonald’s or Burger King for a kid’s meal. You don’t want to let your child
choose another restaurant, yet, you still want him to practice his decision-making skills. This can be
accomplished by setting up an alternate response question such as “We are going to lunch. Do you want to go
to McDonald’s or Burger King for a kid’s meal?” An alternate response question gives your child an illusion of
control, but you are really in control because you limited the restaurant choice to McDonald’s or Burger King and
you limited the food choice to a kid’s meal.
Salespeople use the alternate response question all the time. When you go to a car dealership, a good
salesperson will not ask you if you want to buy a car. They will ask you if you like blue cars or red cars. If you
answer, “Blue cars,” the salesperson will show you blue cars. If you answer, “Red cars,” the salesperson will
show you red cars. If your answer is a color other than blue or red, then the salesperson will show you that color
of car. Good salespeople give the customers the illusion that they are in control of the car buying experience,
when in fact the salespeople are directing you through a well-choreographed presentation.
Strategy #2: Use the verbal technique of “status elevation” to make people
feel better about themselves and see you as a friend. Status elevation is a
technique that satisﬁes an individual’s need for recognition. I discovered this
approach one day when I was with my son, Bryan, at a bookstore. An author
was signing books at a booth in the front of the store. Nobody was at the
booth, so Bryan and I went over to talk with the author. While my son spoke
with the woman, I looked through her book. I noticed that her style of writing
reminded me of Jane Austen. I mentioned this to the author. Her eyes lit up
and her cheeks took on a pinkish hue. She replied, “Really? I don’t have much
time to write. I have three kids. My husband is in the military and is gone a lot
of the time. I want to go back to college to ﬁnish my degree. I left school to get
married. at was a mistake I’ll always regret.” With one comment, this
woman was telling me her life story like I was a long-lost friend.
I tried this technique several more times with the same results. Once, I met
an aspiring candidate from the Republican Party. After we talked politics for
several minutes, I remarked that his political style reminded me of Ronald
Regan. e young man puﬀed up and told me about his family upbringing,
where he went to college, and many other personal details that indicated he
saw me as someone worthy of being liked. Status elevation can take the form
of a simple compliment.
MOPPING UP A SCHOOL GRAFFITI PROBLE M
On one occasion, I interviewed a janitor at a high school regarding some racist
graﬃti that had appeared sometime during the previous night. At the outset of
the interview, I attempted to build some rapport with him. I commented that
he had a big job taking care of such a large building all by himself. He told me
about how he designed a system that allowed him to accomplish multiple tasks
at the same time by following the shortest routes through the building. I
