processing, which disrupts the need to reciprocate with the question, “Where
do you work?”
I used the need to reciprocate when I interviewed suspects. I would always
oﬀer the suspect something to drink such as coﬀee, tea, water, or soda at the
beginning of the interview (the television term is interrogation). I did this to
invoke the need to reciprocate. In return for the drink, I hope to receive
something in return such as intelligence information or a confession.
During your conversation, you should seek common ground (Law of
Similarity) with the other person. You should also use empathic statements to
keep the focus on that individual. In short, you want to make the other person
feel good about themselves (Golden Rule of Friendship), and if you are
successful, they will like you and seek future opportunities to share your
company.
USING A THIRD-PARTY APPROACH TO DISCOVER THE WAY PEOPLE
REALLY FEEL
In general, people are reluctant to talk about themselves and how they really
feel about someone or something. However, people are less hesitant to talk
about others, perhaps to avoid revealing too much information about
themselves. You can use this human characteristic to learn some very closely
held (intimate) information about a person of interest. is is achieved by
using the elicitation technique known as internal/external foci.
Here’s an example of how the technique works. Most couples in a
monogamous relationship would like to know if their partner is predisposed to
cheat on them. If you ask your signiﬁcant other if they would, in fact, cheat on
you, rarely will you hear, “Yeah, I don’t have any problem with that.” ey may
be thinking that, but would surely not say it out loud.
To ﬁnd out what your loved one really thinks about cheating, you need to
approach the topic from a third-person perspective. Instead of asking the direct
question, “What do you think about cheating?” you want to say, “My friend
Susan caught her husband cheating. What do you think about that?” When a
person is confronted with a third-party observation, they tend to look inside
themselves to ﬁnd the answer and tell you what they really think.
Of course, the answer you want to hear is “Cheating is wrong. I would
never do that to you.” However, be prepared for answers such as “Everybody
cheats nowadays,” “If a wife can’t take care of her husband’s needs, what else is
a man to do?” “If my wife treated me the same way she treated him, I’d cheat
on her, too,” and “It’s no wonder, they haven’t been getting along lately.”
ese answers tend to reﬂect what a person really thinks about cheating.
e individual in this case tends to think that extramarital aﬀairs are acceptable
under certain conditions, and he or she is therefore predisposed to cheat when
those conditions are met. ese “third-person” responses are not 100 percent
accurate, but they do provide insights into your loved one’s predisposition to
cheat and are much more reﬂective of his or her true feelings than any answer
you might get through direct questions on the issue.
HE’S NOT WORTH THE WEIGHT
A student of mine, Linda, was in a serious relationship with a young man and
contemplating marriage. She struggled with a weight problem and exercised
regularly to keep in shape. However, she knew that she would eventually gain
weight as she aged or if she were to become pregnant. She wanted to know
how her boyfriend would feel if she put on extra pounds. She was concerned
he might have problems with it.
One evening, Linda suggested to her boyfriend that they watch the TV
show e Biggest Loser. e program highlights morbidly obese people who
enter into a program that includes exercise, diet, and lifestyle changes to shed
pounds. e person who loses the most weight by the end of the show wins a
large prize. Halfway through the show, her boyfriend blurted out, “If my wife
ever got like that, I’d kick her to the curb.”
Linda’s concerns appeared justiﬁed. Her boyfriend was commenting from a
third-person perspective, so he revealed his true feelings. She tested him by
asking the direct question, “If I ever became overweight, would you kick me to
the curb?” Predictably, her boyfriend replied, “No, honey, I’d love you no
matter how much you weighed.”
But by using the internal/external foci elicitation technique, she found out
how he really felt. She eventually broke up with him.
