ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
I would like to express my appreciation to Dave and Lynda Mills of Dave Mills
Photography in Lancaster, California, for taking the photographs in this book.
Both Dave and Lynda graciously contributed their photographic skills to
provide accurate depictions of selected techniques presented in these pages. I
would like to thank Andrew Cardone and my daughter, Brooke Schafer, for
volunteering their time and talent to serve as models for the photographs in
this book. I would like to thank Jenny Chaney, L. Michael Wells, Daniel
Potter, Cory Garza, and Tony DeCicco for reviewing the manuscript and
oﬀering their comments and suggestions. I would also like to thank Randy
Marcoz, whom I have worked with for many years teaching and developing
new ideas to enhance people’s communication skills. A special thanks to Mike
Dilley, author and historian, whom I have worked with for many years
developing and perfecting the many techniques presented in this book. He also
reviewed and edited the manuscript and provided invaluable advice in crafting
the ﬁnal draft. I would also like to acknowledge the eﬀorts of my English
teachers throughout my educational career, who had the courage to identify
the weakness in my writing and the patience to help me strengthen my writing
skills.
JACK SCHAFER
I have been blessed with wonderful people who have provided me with
encouragement, inspiration, and insight when I needed it most. I would like to
recognize them here—alphabetically—and thank each one for adding meaning
and joy to my life. If I have inadvertently overlooked anyone, my sincerest
apologies.
Lewis Andrews, Alan and Susan Balfour, Loretta Barrett, Ann and Steve
Batchelor, Lyle Berman, Carole Bloch, Stephanie Boyer, Avery Cardoza, C. T.
Chan, Grace Chock, Cynthia Cohen, Don Delitz, Alex DeSilva, Maurice
DeVaz, Jim Doyle, Julio and Carmen Enriquez, Burt, Barbara and Daniel
Friedman, Sally Fuller, Jean Golden, John Gollehon, Jan Gordon, David and
Odean Hargis, Steve Harris, Phil Hellmuth, Paulette and Kevin Herbert, Tom
Johnson, Grace Jones, Sandra Karlins, Miriam and Arnold Karlins, Robert
Kindya, Jerry Koehler, Albert Koh, Freddie Koh, Ray Kuik, Jim Levine, Len-  
McCully, Rob Mercado, Debra Miceli, Chad Michaels, Peter Miller, Joe
Navarro, Jacqueline O’Steen, Fran Regin, Maryanne Rouse, John Russell,
Wallace Russell, Harry, Jeannie, Libby and Molly Schroder, Steven Schussler,
Mike Shackleford, Stan Sludikoﬀ, Joan and Eric Steadman, Gary Walters,
Annette, Jill and Michelle Weinberg, Robert Welker, Tom Wheelen, Ken
VanVoorhis, and Anthony Vitale.
Finally, Jack and I want to extend a special thanks to Matthew Benjamin—
our editor extraordinaire—and all the other wonderful people at Simon &
Schuster who contributed mightily to making this manuscript all it could be.
MARVIN KARLINS
