avoided. People who transmit friend signals are viewed as nonthreatening and
approachable. When you meet people, especially for the ﬁrst time, ensure that
you send the right nonverbal cues that allow others to see you in a positive
rather than neutral or negative light.
THE “BIG THREE” FRIEND SIGNALS
What exactly are these nonverbal friend signals you can use to enhance your
chances of other people taking positive notice of you and laying a positive
groundwork for a friendship, whether for a night or a lifetime? ere are
numerous signals to choose from, but, for our purposes, three critical cues are
essential to use if you want to encourage others to see you as a likable person
and worthy of possible friendship. ey are the “eyebrow ﬂash,” “head tilt,”
and the real, as opposed to fake, “smile” (yes, the human brain can detect the
diﬀerence!).
THE EYEBROW FLASH
e eyebrow ﬂash is a quick up-and-down movement of the eyebrows that
lasts for about one-sixth of a second and is used as a primary, nonverbal friend
signal. As individuals approach one another they eyebrow-ﬂash each other to
send the message they don’t pose a threat. Within ﬁve to six feet of meeting
someone, our brains look for this signal. If the signal is present and we
reciprocate, our nonverbal communication is telling the other person we are
not a foe to be feared or avoided. Most people do not realize that they eyebrow
ﬂash because the gesture is almost an unconscious one. Experiment for
yourself: watch individuals as they meet each other for the ﬁrst time and, if
possible, in subsequent interactions. When people greet people for the ﬁrst
time in an oﬃce or social setting, they use a verbal greeting along with the
eyebrow ﬂash. Verbal greetings could include “How are you?” “What’s up?” or
“How’s it going?” e second time people see each other, they don’t have to say
anything, but they do exchange eyebrow ﬂashes, or in the case of males, display
chin juts. A chin jut is a forward and slightly upward movement of the chin.
e next time you meet someone, pay close attention to what you do and to
what the other person does. You will be amazed at the ﬂurry of nonverbal
activity  that takes place when people meet. You will be even more amazed that
you went through your entire life and never recognized the nonverbal cues you
have displayed.
Eyebrow ﬂashes can be sent over long distances. If you are interested in
meeting someone who is across a crowded room, send an eyebrow ﬂash and
watch for a return signal. If a reciprocating eyebrow ﬂash is sent, further
involvement is possible. No return signal could indicate a lack of interest.
erefore, you can use eyebrow ﬂashes as a kind of early warning system to
help you determine if the person you are interested in is interested in you. e
lack of a return eyebrow ﬂash might save you from an awkward moment, or
outright rejection, and indicate that your best course of action is to look
elsewhere for a more receptive individual to approach.

