in presenting my case. I was able to tailor my presentation to the people who
disagreed with me and win them over.
WHISPERING
Whispering is an intimate behavior and positive friend signal. Not every one
can whisper in your ear with impunity. When you see whispering taking place
between two individuals, you can be relatively certain a close personal
relationship exists.
FOOD FORKING
Imagine sitting in a restaurant and some stranger comes over to your table and
picks food oﬀ your plate with a fork! You would certainly feel uneasy, and be
most unlikely to ask the individual to join you for dinner. Now imagine you
are having a pleasant meal with your family and a son or sister reaches over and
picks a piece of food oﬀ your plate with a fork. e probability is your reaction
would be radically diﬀerent from when the stranger did the same thing. e
diﬀerence is that you have a close relationship with your family members and,
under these conditions, food forking is considered appropriate. Food forking,
then, is a friend signal and, if permitted, indicates a close relationship between
the person possessing the food and the person reaching for it.
EXPRESSIVE GESTURES
e amount and intensity of gestures people use vary from one culture to
another and even within cultures. Some people are naturally more expressive
than others, even in more socially restrained cultures. Nonetheless, people who
like one another tend to display more expressive gestures. Expressive gestures
signal interest in what the other person is saying and keeps the focus of the
conversation on the speaker.
Speakers can emphasize a point with a sharp downward movement of the
hand at the end of a sentence, or express openness and sincerity with extended
open palms. Expressive gestures reinforce verbal communication and mutual
interest.
You can encourage potential friends to continue speaking (and like you
more because of it) by additional head nodding, smiles, and focused attention
(when you lean forward, cock your head slightly and appear to be listening
intensely to what is being said). Be aware that nonverbal gestures can also
signal discomfort, dislike, or disinterest.
HEAD NODDING
One way we signal to a speaker that we are engaged with them and that they
should continue is with a head nod. It tells the speaker to keep talking. A
double nod tells the speaker to increase the tempo of the speech. Multiple head
nods or a single slow nod tend to cause a disruption in the speakers cadence.
Excessive head nodding can rush a response. Rapid head nodding sends a
nonverbal cue for the speaker to hurry his or her response, usually because the
listener wants to say something or is disinterested. Inappropriate rapid head
nodding can be perceived as rude behavior or an attempt to dominate the
conversation. is behavior takes the focus oﬀ the speaker and turns the
spotlight onto the listener, which is a clear violation of the Golden Rule of
Friendship, and will be discussed in the next chapter. Used correctly, head
nodding allows the speaker to fully express his or her thoughts in a satisfying
manner. If you use appropriate head nods, you will be perceived as a good
listener, and viewed in a positive light.
VERBAL NUDGES
Verbal nudges reinforce head nodding and encourage the speaker to continue
talking. Verbal nudges consist of speech conﬁrmation indicators such as “I see”
and “Go on” plus word ﬁllers such as “Ummm” and “Uh-huh.” Verbal nudges
let the speaker know that you are not only listening but are also validating the
speaker’s message with verbal conﬁrmation.
FOCUSED ATTENTION
