communication in determining relationship eﬀectiveness. It also demonstrates
how the words we use can make the diﬀerence between success and failure in
making friends and achieving our objectives.
Stacey, a recent college graduate, secured a coveted position at a prestigious
chemical company. She completed each assigned task with passion and skill.
She kept up with new developments in the ﬁeld and always sought new and
more cost-eﬀective techniques to shore up the company’s bottom line.
One day, Stacey discovered an innovative method to reduce the cost of
manufacturing a certain chemical. It was a major breakthrough and she went
directly to her manager to report what she had found.
She could hardly contain her excitement when she entered her boss’s oﬃce
and didn’t even sit down before she blurted out the good news: “You’ve been
manufacturing this chemical all wrong. I found a new and cheaper way to do
it!”
Much to her dismay, Stacey’s manager dismissed her ﬁndings with a wave of
his hand and admonished her to concentrate on her assigned work. Crushed,
Stacey returned to her cubicle and vowed never to take the initiative again.
Sadly, Stacey never understood why her idea was rejected. In reality, her
intentions were good, but the manner in which she communicated her idea
was not well thought out or appropriate. Communication is much more than
conveying ideas; it also encompasses how you convey the ideas in real-world
situations. Stacey failed to consider some basic psychological tenets of
successful communication. In Stacey’s statement to her manager she made
several communication errors that led to her manager’s rejection of her idea.
1. “If I’m Right, Then You’re Wrong.” People rarely consider the push-pull qualities of declarations
such as “I’m right” or “My way is better.” If you are right, then the other person is
automatically assumed to be wrong. If your way is better, then the other person’s way is
automatically assumed to be worse. e “I’m right and you’re wrong” paradigm forces people
to assume a defensive posture to protect their egos or reputations, or for myriad other reasons.
A person who is forced into a defensive posture by such statements is less likely to consider
new ideas, let alone adopt them.
2. Us Against Them or I Against You. Stacey used the pronouns you and I. e use of these pronouns
creates an adversarial situation. e you and I paradigm pits one person against the other. In
Stacey’s case, she unintentionally created an adversarial relationship between herself and her
boss. Adversarial settings create winners and losers. Winners conquer; losers are left to lick their
wounds. Adversarial relationships invite competition along with negative feelings, which are
not conducive to eﬀective communication.
3. Cognitive Dissonance. Cognitive dissonance is triggered when a person holds two or more
conﬂicting beliefs simultaneously. When people experience cognitive dissonance, it is not
pleasant: ey become frustrated, angry, and experience psychological disequilibrium. In
Stacey’s situation, she unintentionally created cognitive dissonance in her manager. If Stacey is
right, then her manager is wrong. If Stacey is right, then she is smart and her manager is not so
smart. People experiencing cognitive dissonance have several options to regain their
equilibrium. In Stacey’s circumstances, her manager could admit that she is right and he is
wrong. Or he could try to convince Stacey that his method is correct and her method is not
viable. Finally, he could dismiss Stacey outright as an immature, well-meaning employee who
needs to be put in her place. Stacey’s manager chose the latter to resolve his dissonance. When
someone experiences cognitive dissonance, it rarely produces a positive outcome.
4. Ego. People are naturally egocentric; they think the world revolves around them. Stacey
demonstrated her self-focus when she used the “I” word. She elevated herself above her boss,
thus unintentionally attacking his ego. Faced with such a challenge, his thought process was
predictable. “I’ve been a manager for twenty years. Who does this inexperienced, snot-nosed
college graduate think she is? She needs to get some experience under her belt before prancing
into my oﬃce and telling me I’ve been doing things wrong for two decades. She needs to go
back to her cubicle and do as she is told.” In this instance, the manager’s ego trumped common
sense and the company’s all-important bottom line. Egos have hurt more people and torpedoed
more good ideas than one would care to admit.
LEARNING TO KEEP YOUR EGO IN CHECK
Instead of saying, “You’ve been manufacturing this chemical all wrong. I found
a new and cheaper way to do it,” Stacey should have employed psychologically
sound principles to shape her communication. A more appropriate way to
inform the boss of her signiﬁcant breakthrough would be:
“Sir, I would like your advice on something that would make our company
more proﬁtable.”
Addressing her manager as “Sir” shows respect and demonstrates that Stacey
sees her boss as a superior. e introductory phrase “I would like your advice
on something . . .” accomplishes ﬁve objectives. First, Stacey creates an
inclusionary environment. e manager feels as though he is included in the
process. Second, cognitive dissonance is avoided, thus increasing the
probability that the manager will be open to new ideas. ird, the manager’s
illusion of self-focus is bolstered. e manager will likely think, “Of course,
Stacey is seeking my advice because I am intelligent and I have twenty years of
experience behind me.” Fourth, this introductory phrase could foster a-  
mentor-mentee relationship. If this is achieved, then Stacey’s success also
becomes her manager’s success. Fifth, showing the manager respect and
