upraised middle ﬁnger. It is doubtful anyone intent on establishing a positive
interaction with another person would transmit this gesture. e problem is
that certain gestures that are “harmless” (have no negative connotation) in one
culture might be highly oﬀensive in another. Just as the same words have
diﬀerent meanings across diﬀerent cultures, so, too, do nonverbal
communications. If you note that somebody reacts negatively toward you for
no “apparent” reason you might want to consider if any gesture you just made
might have been perceived as oﬀensive to them.
SCRUNCHED NOSE
Like other foe signals, a scrunched nose makes anyone observing it less likely
to see you in a positive light and less open to any further overtures you send
their way.
A Scrunched Nose
CLOTHING, ACCESSORIES, AND OTHER ITEMS WORN ON THE BODY
e old saying “one man’s ﬂoor is another man’s ceiling” is applicable to this
particular foe signal (or cluster of signals). For example, if you’re sporting a
leather jacket with a skull and crossbones, have numerous tattoos on your
arms, and are wearing a spike necklace, it might be interpreted by someone
who doesn’t know you as a person to avoid at all costs. In that sense, your
appearance is a foe signal. On the other hand, if you happen to be at a death
metal concert, the same outﬁt might be seen as a friend signal worthy of
notice. us you will need to determine, using common sense, whether the
way you are clothed and accessorized will likely be perceived as a friend or foe
signal by a person you might want to approach. Just because someone is
dressed diﬀerently than you doesn’t guarantee that your appearance will
automatically be a “turnoﬀ,” but the adage “birds of a feather ﬂock together”
should be considered when it comes to interactions between individuals with
signiﬁcantly diﬀerent ways of adorning their bodies.
My son, Bradley, inadvertently taught me a valuable lesson about assessing
people by the clothes they wear. In high school, he went through a phase where
he was all about men’s fashion, which included spending every penny he
earned at his part-time job after school on clothes and accessories. I
accompanied Bradley to the shopping mall one day to buy a wallet. He looked
at the most expensive wallets in an exclusive clothier shop. e one he bought
cost $150. I was shocked. I pulled out my three-fold wallet and reminded him
that my wallet only cost about $20 including tax. “No, Dad,” he replied. “It’s
the details that make the diﬀerence. You can wear expensive clothes and shoes
but people will know you are a ‘poser’ if you pull out a twenty-dollar, three-
fold wallet.” My son eventually passed through that phase in his life and is
back to wearing faded blue jeans and sweatshirts, but I still carry the lesson he
taught me.
From that day forward I paid closer attention to the details. I look at stitch
count in shirts. e more stitches per inch, the higher the quality of the shirt.
Four-millimeter buttons are sewn on higher-quality shirts. If a man wears an
expensive suit and a cheap watch, he is pretending to be someone he is not.
Unshined shoes are another sign of a poser. People who engage in perception
management often overlook the details, a tell that exposes who they really are.
