If you have children, you can use the internal/external elicitation technique
to probe their feelings about sensitive issues. For instance, let’s say you want to
know if your kids are using drugs. If you asked them the direct question, “Are
you using drugs?” they would frame their answer within social norms and
answer, “No, of course not, drugs are bad.”
e best way to ﬁnd out how your children really feel about drugs is to ask
them from a third-party perspective. For example, “My friend’s son got caught
in school with marijuana. What’s your take on that?” You want to hear
“Marijuana is bad and I would never use it.” However, be prepared for “at’s
stupid. He should have never brought it to school,” “It’s only weed,” or “No
big deal. I know lots of kids who smoke marijuana.” ese responses indicate
that your kid may be using marijuana or is predisposed to experimentation.
Again, these responses are not foolproof evidence of drug use by your child,
but they do provide insights into your child’s predisposition.
RULE #4: EMPATHIZE: USE EMPATHIC STATEMENTS AND OTHER VERBAL
OBSERVATIONS THAT MAKE YOUR LISTENER(S) AWARE THAT YOU KNOW
HOW THEY FEEL.
People develop positive feelings toward those individuals who can “walk in
their shoes” and understand what they are experiencing. Your empathic
statements and/or statements of concern send a message to the listener that
you comprehend their circumstances and realize what they have to say is
meaningful. In doing so, you are fulﬁlling the other person’s need to be
recognized and appreciated. is makes them feel better about themselves and
in turn makes them feel better about you, which encourages friendship
development.
You’ll be amazed at how often you will get the chance to use empathic
statements to start conversations and jump-start getting people to like you. All
it takes is a willingness to observe people for a few moments before you speak
to them. What you will see, more often than you might expect, is the
individual you are watching saying or doing something that reveals they are
dissatisﬁed with the current situation they are in. is is especially true when
you are dealing with individuals whom you might only confront once, or at
infrequent intervals, during your life, such as salespeople, clerks, service
personnel, and the like.
You can be almost certain, for example, that if you eat out at a restaurant
during prime dinner hours, your server will be rushed. Simply saying, “Boy,
you look busy!” will usually bring an aﬃrmative response and, along with it,
superior service. e individual you spoke with appreciates that you noticed
them and recognized the work challenge they face. It makes them feel better
about themselves and, based on the Golden Rule of Friendship, they are going
to like you for what you did. If you want to be even more empathic, add a
compliment to your original statement that allows them to ﬂatter themselves.
“Boy, you’re really busy! I don’t know how you do it.” Or: “Boy, you’re busy!
ere’s no way I could keep up with all those orders.”
ere are times that you don’t need to witness a person of interest’s
discomfort or complaints to make eﬀective empathic comments. is happens
when you can infer that a person might be experiencing diﬃculties and would
appreciate recognition of their plight. To illustrate: If it is late in the day and
you see a woman clerk in high heels working the ﬂoor in a department store,
you might comment, “Wow, your feet must get tired with you having to stand
up at work all day.” Chances are you’re going to be right and the salesperson
will respond positively to your empathetic behavior.
Parents can eﬀectively use empathic statements when they want to
encourage their children to talk to them, especially when they are teenagers.
Most teenagers are reluctant to openly share information and experiences with
their parents, for a wide variety of reasons. Demanding, threatening, or
cajoling a response typically ends in a shields-up reaction, causing the teen to
become more resolute in their determination not to talk with you.
To avoid this nonproductive response, use an empathic statement such as
“You look like you are thinking about something pretty serious,” “You look as
though something is really bothering you,” or “You’re worried about
something.” Your teen might respond in several ways. First, they could agree
with you and disclose what is on his or her mind. Second, they could provide a
partial response. In this event, construct another empathic statement to tease
out a few more details. Most teens want to tell their parents what’s bothering
them. ey just need a little encouragement and the belief that talking to you
