children. Men with lower self-esteem tend to select women who are less
physically attractive and women with lower self-esteem tend to select mates
who are lower income earners and with less disposable income.
Sometimes lower-status individuals will try to “fake” higher status in an
attempt to establish relationships with people “out of their league.” For
example, a man might pretend to be a high-income earner by lavishing a
woman with expensive gifts, driving a car he cannot aﬀord, and spending
money he does not have. is strategy, although eﬀective in the short run,
usually ends catastrophically as time passes and the suitor, unable to aﬀord his
ruse, is unmasked and his true worth revealed.
DON’T BANK ON IT
One of my students told me of a common ruse that he and his friends often
employ on nights out. On the way to a bar, they will stop by a large bank’s
ATM and pick through dropped receipts until they ﬁnd ones that have
especially large balances printed on them. ese they pocket for later. en, if
the student or one of his friends meets a girl who is above his ﬁnancial
standing, he will casually write his phone number on the back of the purloined
receipt—creating the illusion that he is a wealthy man.
THE LAW OF AVAILABILITY (SCARCITY)
People are attracted to individuals and things they cannot readily obtain. In the
case with things, people are more attracted to a coveted object because it is out
of their reach. When the object of desire is ﬁnally gained, the attraction for the
object rapidly diminishes. Christmas presents provide a good example of this
phenomenon. Toys children wanted all year long are discarded several days
after they are retrieved from gift boxes under the tree. e Law of Availability
also holds true for human interaction, particularly in the early stages of a
developing relationship. e dating rule your mom swore by has scientiﬁc
merit. An individual should not always make him or herself readily available to
the person they are targeting for a longer-term relationship. A certain level of
unavailability will make you more of a mystery and a challenge.
Remember Vladimir, the spy discussed in the Introduction? As you may
recall, after days of reading the newspaper and sitting silently with Vladimir, he
asked me why I kept coming back day after day. I folded the newspaper over,
looked at him, and said, “Because I want to talk to you.” en I immediately
returned the newspaper to the upright position and continued reading,
ignoring him. is action further increased Vladimir’s curiosity and created
scarcity. Finally, Vladimir made up his mind to talk to me and I ignored him,
increasing Vladimir’s drive to talk to me.
INCREASED RESTRAINT INCREASES DRIVE
Parents are fully aware of this law! If you tell your children not to do
something, they want to do it all the more. My own daughter went through a
teenage phase of testing her mom and me. She once brought home a young
man to meet us. He had four-inch-high gelled prongs that stood atop his head,
tattoos covering most of his exposed skin, and a motorcycle in our driveway. I
cordially greeted him without saying what I really felt about him or how
disappointed I was with my daughter’s choice of companion.
e next day, my daughter asked me what I thought of the young man. I
wanted to command her never to see him again, but I knew that if I increased
restraint, she would be that much more motivated to continue to date him.
Instead, I chose the following strategy. I told my daughter that her mother and
I raised her to make good judgments and that we trusted her decisions. If she
felt the young man was a good person to have in her life, we would support
her decision.
I never saw him again.
Fast-forward ten years. My daughter is now twenty-six years old. We sat in
the kitchen reminiscing about her teen years. To my surprise, she brought up
the young man. She admitted that she brought him home to make her mom
and me mad for some now forgotten transgression we committed. She further
admitted that when I told her that I trusted her judgment and knew she would
make the right decision, her conscience panged. She knew he was wrong for
her and that she was wrong to bring him home to spite us. She commented
that it was ironic that she intended to make us mad but, in the end, she was
