recipient of this greeting almost punched the speaker in the mouth. It turns
out that the angry student was from the Middle East, where it is considered a
great insult to be referred to as a “dog.”
Word mines. Watch for them and be ready to treat the injured relationship
quickly and decisively so as to minimize any damage done. It’s worth saying
again: the hazard of word mines is that speakers do not know what emotional
meanings others attach to otherwise innocuous words. us, they never know
when a word mine can be “set oﬀ.” If, as noted earlier, speakers are not
watching the listener, they might not be aware that they insulted or oﬀended
them.
Even if they do become aware that they have set oﬀ a negative response in
the listener, most speakers, rather than trying to defuse the situation, tend to
respond defensively to the unexpected emotional outburst, which
unfortunately only intensiﬁes the initial response of that individual. A speaker
who steps on a word mine and reacts defensively when confronted with an
angry listener is often seen as insensitive and lacking compassion. e speaker,
on the other hand, is often left confused, not knowing what to do or what to
say in response to the listener’s emotional explosion.
Empathic statements are the best way to respond to word mine explosions.
ey capture a person’s feelings and reﬂect them back to the person, using
parallel language. Empathic statements acknowledge the person’s feelings
without the need to go on the defensive.
As you’ll recall from an earlier chapter, the basic formula for constructing
empathic statements is “So you . . .” is basic approach keeps the focus on the
other person and away from the individual who stepped on the word mine.
People naturally tend to say something to the eﬀect of “I understand how you
feel.” at leads the other person to automatically think, No, you don’t know
how I feel because you are not me.
Empathic statements allow individuals to vent their emotions. Once the
pent-up emotions are vented, the conversation can usually return to a normal
exchange of information. Avoiding a heated argument with an emotional
person increases the probability that the relationship will have a chance to
survive and grow.
Once you step on a word mine, learn from it. Be sure to aﬃx a mental red
ﬂag to avoid detonations in the future. Unfortunately, the problem of word
mines is unlikely to go away in the near future. In fact, the virtual world in
which we live is strewn with dangerous word mines. You can never be sure
when you will step on one. Personal relationships are more diﬃcult to initiate
and maintain when the verbal landscape is dotted with word mines, both
discovered and hidden.
Communication mishaps are likely to increase in the coming years because
people rely more and more on electronic media such as texting, emails, and
Internet postings to communicate. Symbols such as brackets, periods, and
commas that form happy, winking, or surprised faces often punctuate
sentences to provide additional clues to the reader as to the true meaning of
the communication. Emoticons are also used to clarify messages. When text
messaging ﬁrst became popular, I remember texting my daughter. She
responded to one of my text messages with the letters “LOL.” I wrote back, “I
love you too.” Her response was “Ha, ha. LOL means laugh out loud.” I wrote
back, “I thought it meant Lots of Love.” Her ﬁnal exchange was “I love you
too, Dad.” My communication faux pas with my daughter ended with a
chuckle, but it demonstrates the danger of miscommunication when people
don’t have nonverbal cues to guide a conversation. When using electronic
media to communicate, don’t use sarcasm, understatements, or words that have
double meanings if you want to avoid the possibility of miscommunication.
e best way to keep your verbal communication eﬀective in a world ﬁlled
with word mines is to:
1. ink about the words you are going to use before you say them. Scan ahead for possible word
mines that you’ll want to eliminate from your speech.
2. Observe your listeners for any unusual reaction while you are speaking. It might indicate that a
word mine has been tripped.
3. Do not become defensive or angry if a listener becomes agitated over your use of a word mine
(even if you didn’t know it existed); and
4. Immediately take the time to ﬁnd out if the listener’s discomfort is the result of a word mine
detonation. If it is, apologize for using the word or phrase, explain that you were unaware that
it had a negative connotation to the listener, and assure him or her that you will not use it
again. And then, be sure you don’t.
THE LIP PURSE
