that aroused their ire in the ﬁrst place. Presumptive statements are constructed
in such a fashion that angry individuals have diﬃculty not following the
directed (recommended) course of action. e following dialogue
demonstrates the big-three approach to breaking the anger cycle.
SUPERVISOR: I expected you to have your report done by this morning. Your behavior is
unacceptable. (anger)
EMPLOYEE: I couldn’t complete the report because I didn’t receive the data from the sales
department. ey said they would send it within the hour. (provide an explanation)
SUPERVISOR: at’s no excuse. You should have gone to the sales department to get the
report. You knew how important it was to get the report done by this morning. I have a
meeting with the client this afternoon. I’m not sure what I’m going to do. (rejecting the
explanation)
EMPLOYEE: You’re upset because the client is expecting the report this afternoon. (empathic
statement)
SUPERVISOR: Yeah. You’re making me look bad. (venting)
EMPLOYEE: You’re disappointed because you expected me to have the report ﬁnished this
morning. (empathic statement)
SUPERVISOR: Exactly. at’s an understatement. (shoulders droop accompanied by a deep
exhale; venting completed)
EMPLOYEE: I’ll go get the sales report now and get you the report before your meeting this
afternoon. (presumptive statement)
SUPERVISOR: Okay. See what you can do. (anger resolution)
A CLOSER LOOK AT HOW THE “BIG THREE” WORK TO “BREAK THE ANGER
CYCLE”
Empathic Statements
In breaking the anger cycle, empathic statements are invaluable. When an
angry person ﬁrst hears an empathic statement it can be surprising and
confusing. When not expected, it can initially cause suspicion, but when
sustained it is diﬃcult not to appreciate the concern it represents. Empathy
thus quickly leads to trust.
e more you can empathize, the more you can get immediate feedback on
what a person is thinking about what you are saying to them. As a
consequence, you can modify what you are saying and doing if you see your
initial approach is not working.
e question is: How do you do this? How do you empathize eﬀectively?
How do you ﬁnd out what other people are feeling? All you have to go on is
observing: 1) what they say, 2) how they say it, and 3) what they do.
If you want to move an angry person toward a resolution, detecting their
emotional state is the ﬁrst step. When you can sense their emotion, you can
then use this to move them in the direction you want them to take.
e trick to spotting a person’s feelings is to pay close attention to verbal
and nonverbal changes in that individual in response to external events. If you
say, “How are you?” and the corners of the person’s mouth turn down and
their voice tone goes ﬂat, then you might detect that all is not well.
e better you are at spotting changes in verbal and nonverbal cues, the
greater your potential ability at empathizing. Watch for small changes on the
face. Listen for tension in the voice and emphasis on speciﬁc words. Listen for
emotional words.
To avoid getting swamped by another person’s emotions, learn to dip in and
out of the association that makes you feel what they do. Go in, test the
temperature, and then get out to a place where you can think more rationally.
Unless you are sure, it ca n be a good idea to reﬂect back on the other person
what you are sensing of their feelings, to check that you have it right. After all,
the only individual who can conﬁrm empathy is the person whose emotions
are being sensed. Reﬂecting back has an eﬀect, typically leading the other
person to appreciate that you  really care about them and hence increasing their
trust in you.
To people who are not angry, empathic statements might seem patronizing,
but this is not the case for angry people, for two reasons. First, the ﬁght or
ﬂight response is engaged, and angry people cannot logically process
information; in this case, empathic statements fall within the human baseline
and if properly constructed, will not be detected by the angry person. Second,
people naturally think that others should listen to them and be sympathetic,
particularly when they are angry.
e key to constructing eﬀective empathic statements is to identify the
underlying reason for the anger. Simply saying, “So you’re angry” is an
empathic statement, but it is stating the obvious and could sound patronizing,
which would add more fuel to an already angry person. I remember a time
early in my FBI career when I was required to travel extensively. We had three
children at the time, a baby and two toddlers. On one particular trip, I was
