would admit in public, much less to themselves, that they are not dedicated,
determined people.
THIRD-PARTY COMPLIMENTS
You can use a third party to compliment a person you want to  befriend—
without doing it yourself—and still get the “credit” for making the target of your
compliment feel good about themselves and, by extension, feel good about
you. When you directly compliment other people, particularly anybody who
suspects you might want something from them (for example: your date, your
boss, or a friend), they tend to discount your eﬀorts because they suspect you
are intentionally trying to inﬂuence them through ﬂattery. A third-party
compliment eliminates this skepticism.
To construct a third-party compliment you will need to ﬁnd a mutual
friend or acquaintance who knows both you and your person of interest.
Further, you should be relatively certain that the third-party individual you
choose will be likely to pass along your compliment to the person for whom it
was intended. If this transmission of information is successful, the next time
you meet your person of interest, he or she will see you from a positive
perspective. Consider the following exchange and assume you are Mark.
MIKE: I met Mark the other day. He told me he thinks you’re really bright. In fact, he said
you’re one of the most capable problem solvers he has ever met.
SONJA: Oh, really? He said that?
MIKE: at’s what he told me.
Sonja will more readily accept this compliment as related by Mike than if
you (Mark) directly told her the same thing. Additionally, Mike feels free to
tell Sonja exactly what you said, which you may or may not be socially allowed
to say at the beginning stages of a relationship. Indirectly you, through Mike,
allowed Sonja to compliment herself, which makes her feel good about herself,
thus predisposing her to like you before you meet her for the ﬁrst time or at
the point in your relationship when she receives Mike’s third-party
compliment.
CASHING IN ON THIRD-PARTY COMPLIMENTS AT WORK
Beyond the dating landscape, I found third-party compliments to be very
eﬀective in the workplace. A case in point: Money to fund operations within
the FBI is competitive; consequently, not every proposal gets funded. To
improve the probability that my proposals would be approved I would employ
the third-party-compliment strategy.
Several weeks before my proposal was scheduled to be reviewed by the
newly appointed assistant director, I sought out the most notorious gossip in
the oﬃce and casually mentioned to him that it was about time our ﬁeld oﬃce
got an assistant director who ﬁnally knew what he was doing. I also
commented that the new assistant director was a clever man with keen insights
into operational strategies. For gossips, the coin of the realm is information. In
their eyes, they gain value by spreading information they hear to the
individuals who would have interest in hearing it. Sure enough, the boss soon
heard of my comments “through the grapevine.” e assistant director was
more likely to accept this compliment as sincere from a third-party individual
than directly from me. Besides, I did not have access to the assistant director, as
I was in the ﬁeld at the time.
When the assistant director reviewed my proposals, he was pre disposed to
look at them more favorably because of his knowledge of how I viewed him. I
had made him feel good about himself, a fulﬁllment of the Golden Rule of
Friendship, and I had done it in a way that didn’t arouse his suspicions. ird-
party compliments are within normal behavioral parameters and pass a person’s
“territory scan” without arousing an alert. So I had nothing to lose. If my
strategy failed, the downside risk was zero, because I would have lost the
funding anyway. If the technique worked, the upside is successfully achieving
what I wanted. As it tu rned out, most of my proposals were funded.
THIRD PARTY AND THE “PRIMACY EFFECT”
Words cannot change reality, but they can change how people perceive reality.
Words create ﬁlters through which people view the world around them. A
single word can make the diﬀerence between liking and disliking a person.
Consider this example: Your friend Calvin tells you about your new
neighbor, Bill, whom you are meeting for the ﬁrst time. Calvin says, “Your new
