you are looking for. Still, screening mechanisms on certain online sites can be
beneﬁcial in limiting the number of people who contact you.
The Opportunity to “Check People Out”
e Internet is information-rich. It provides a wealth of information for those
people who know how to get it or are interested in learning more about
something or somebody. e Internet should be seen as a tool to learn more
about the people you are considering to develop relationships with, whether
that person is someone you meet face-to-face or online. Obviously, this
information search is more important for potential online friends, because you
don’t have the advantage of information-gathering through verbal and
nonverbal cues available in real-life interactions.
ere is simply no denying that the advent of person-to-person online
communication has dramatically altered the landscape of seeking friends and
building relationships. As this form of digital interaction continues to grow in
popularity, it will have an even greater impact on the way people develop
relationships in the years to come.
What does all this mean for you? To paraphrase Charles Dickens: “It can be
the best of times; it can be the worst of times.” When employed correctly and
with appropriate safeguards, establishing friendships in the digital world can be
a rewarding and fruitful experience; however, plunging headlong into Internet
relationships without proper attention to the potential risks involved is a
sureﬁre recipe for disaster. Before you ﬁre up your laptop or reach for your
smartphone, here are some important things to keep in mind.
CAUTION: IMMORTALITY AHEAD
Facebook. Twitter. Instagram. Chat rooms. Special interest groups. Email.
Blogs. Internet search engines. Dating sites. A literal cornu copia of
opportunities to search for and meet people who could end up being friends or
even lifelong partners.
But be afraid, or to paraphrase the famous Jaws trailer, be very afraid of the
potential price you pay whenever you go on the Internet. Anything you say,
anywhere you visit, any pictures you post, even your emails and instant
messages can gain instant Internet immortality, leaving you with a
cyberfootprint, which, unlike a footprint in the sand, is not easily washed
away!
Increasingly, prospective employers, potential lovers, would-be stalkers,
businesses, and even government agencies are using your cyber activities to
learn more about you and make decisions about how they will treat you, even
if the information they use is decades old!
Please keep in mind that what you post is who you are . . . forever.
Whenever you sit down at the computer and sign onto the Internet, always
keep this sentence in mind: “Would I be embarrassed if what I am about to do
would suddenly appear on the front page of my local newspaper tomorrow, in
a month, or in ten years?” If the answer is “yes” or “maybe,” stop and think
before you hit the send button or enter key . . . i t just might save you heartache
and disappointment tomorrow and down the road.
LEARN AND USE PROPER DIGITAL ETIQUETTE WHEN VISITING
CYBERSPACE
Technology is evolving so quickly that social norms for using things like
computers and smartphones don’t always keep pace. Nevertheless, there are
some general guidelines that, if followed, should make online experiences safer
and more enjoyable for you and those around you. It will also increase your
chances for making friends, rather than enemies, both online and in the
immediate vicin ity where you are texting, talking, or searching.
Smartphones
In a Florida movie theater a man was shot to death for using his smartphone
after the house lights were dimmed. Chances are you won’t experience a similar
fate should you choose to text or talk in an inappropriate manner or place;
however, there are simple guidelines you’ll want to follow to protect yourself
and your information from harm.
1. All mobile communication devices should be silenced in any public or private location where a
ringtone would be distracting and/or inappropriate.
