two individuals. In fact, he called it a “moment of truth” because it was these
moments that shaped a customer’s view of the company and helped determine
if they would purchase SAS services. Carlzon observed: “Last year each of our
ten million customers came in contact with approximately ﬁve SAS employees.
ese 50 million ‘moments of truth’ are the moments that ultimately
determine whether SAS will succeed or fail as a company. ey are the
moments when we must prove to our customers that SAS is their best
alternative.”
When you meet another person for the ﬁrst time, it is a deﬁning moment
of truth in how that relationship will develop. Will that person treat you like a
friend or shun you like a foe? e Golden Rule of Friendship—If you want people
to like you, make them feel good about  themselves—can be a deciding factor in
which side the person puts you on.
Unlike some of the techniques that will be presented later, which only
become relevant when you are looking for long-term relationships rather than
brief or sporadic interactions, the Golden Rule of Friendship serves as the key
to all successful relationships, whether they are of short, medium, or long
duration.
Do not underestimate the power and importance of this rule in making
friends. As an FBI Special Agent, I was required to meet people from every
station in life and convince them to provide sensitive information, become
spies, or confess to a variety of crimes. e key to the successful completion of
these daunting tasks was my ability to get people to not only like me but to
trust me and, in many cases, trust me with their lives. e most diﬃcult task
facing new Special Agents bent on getting people to like them is developing
this vital skill. Agents often approached me and asked me to teach them the
techniques to get people to like them instantly. And I gave them the exact same
instruction: If you want people to like you, make them feel good about themselves.
You must focus your attention on the person you are befriending. It sounds
easy, but it takes practice even for trained agents. If you make someone feel
good about themselves, they will credit you with helping them attain that good
feeling. People gravitate toward individuals who make them happy and tend to
avoid people who bring them pain or discomfort.
If every time you meet a person you make them feel good about themselves,
he or she will seek out every opportunity to see you again to experience those
same good feelings. e stumbling block many of my fellow agents confronted
in achieving this objective is the same one we all encounter: our own ego.
People’s egos get in the way of practicing the Golden Rule of Friendship. Most
people think the world revolves around them and they should be the center of
attention. But if you want to appear friendly and attractive to others, you must
forgo your ego and pay attention to the other person and his or her particular
needs and circumstances. Other people will like you when you make them (not
you) the focus of attention.
ink about it: It is unfortunate that we seldom use this powerful rule for
making ourselves more attractive to others while, at the same time, making
those individuals feel better about themselves. We are too busy focusing on
ourselves and not on the people we meet. We put our wants and needs before
the wants and needs of others. e irony of all this is that other people will be
eager to fulﬁll your wants and needs if they like you.
TECHNIQUES TO MAKE PEOPLE FEEL GOOD ABOUT THEMSELVES:
EMPATHIC STATEMENTS
Empathic statements keep the focus of the conversation on the person you are
talking with rather than on yourself. ey are one of the most eﬀective ways to
make people feel good about themselves. Keeping the focus on the other
person is diﬃcult because we are, by nature, ego centric and think the world
revolves around us. Nevertheless, if every time you talk to people they feel
good about themselves, you will have successfully achieved the objective of the
Golden Rule of Friendship and people will like you as a result.
Empathic statements such as “You look like you are having a bad day” or
“You look happy today” let people know that someone is listening to them and
cares to some degree about their well-being. is kind of attention makes us
feel good about ourselves and, more important, predisposes us to like the
person who gave us the attention.
Empathic statements also close the discourse cycle. When a person says
something, they want feedback to know if their message was received and
