8
THE PERILS AND PROMISE OF
RELATIONSHIPS IN A DIGITAL WORLD
Online everyone can be who they want to be. It only gets tricky when you meet them in the
real world.
—TOKII.COM
is is a true story. A love story of sorts, one that could only happen in our
digital age. It involves a then-sixty-eight-year-old professor and a Czech bikini
model. is particular academician was not lacking in brainpower: He worked
as a theoretical particle physicist at the University of North Carolina, Chapel
Hill, where he had been employed for three decades.
e professor, still lonely after his recent divorce, visited some online dating
sites, where he connected with the Czech beauty. After a ﬂurry of emails, chat
room sessions, and instant messages, it became obvious to the professor that
the stunning model wanted to give up her career and marry him. It never
seemed to cross his mind that the woman on the Internet might have been an
imposter or why a young, attractive model would choose him as a husband.
Sadly, he found out why, the hard way. After many unsuccessful attempts by
the professor to speak with the young woman on the phone, she agreed to go
from virtual reality to real life. All the professor had to do was ﬂy down to
Bolivia, where she was currently working, and meet her. is he readily agreed
to do. e rest of the story is almost too painful to relate.
Upon arriving late in Bolivia due to a ticketing problem, the professor
discovered that his “girlfriend” had already left. However, she told him not to
worry, she would send him a ticket to Brussels, Belgium, where he could join
her while she did a photo shoot. Her only request was to bring along a bag that
she had left behind in Bolivia. At the Buenos Aires airport, the bag was
searched. Hidden inside were 1,980 grams of cocaine. He did end up being
charged for drug smuggling, but fortunately for him he received a very light
sentence.
And what was the real Czech bikini model’s reaction to all this? Fear, over
her name being associated with drug smuggling and “sympathy” for her
academic suitor, who, of course, she had never met on the Internet or
anywhere else. According to Maxine Swann, a reporter who did an elaborate
story on the incident for the New York Times, the professor “reported that he
was a month into his prison stay before his fellow prisoners managed to
convince him that the woman he thought he’d been in touch with all this time
had probably been a man impersonating her.”
Based on this story, you might think I recommend abstaining from using
the digital world to meet people and make friends. However, nothing could be
further from the truth. As long as you know how to tell the friends from the
frauds (which this chapter will show you), the online landscape oﬀers some
distinct advantages.
THE INTERNET IS INTROVERT-FRIENDLY
Introverts disclose more information on social networks than they do in face-
to-face encounters. is is because the Internet format allows introverts
suﬃcient time to formulate meaningful responses. Introverts also experience
diﬃculty initiating conversations, especially with strangers. Social networks
eliminate this added social pressure. Social networks also allow introverts to
express themselves without constantly being interrupted by extroverts. Finally,
introverts are more willing to say what they really believe, not having to worry
about the direct exposure to negative feedback that can occur in face-to-face
communication.
Ease of Finding “Common Ground”
If ever there was a chance for the Law of Similarity (Chapter 4) to operate, it
would be on the Internet. When it comes to ﬁnding common ground with
individuals possessing similar interests, the digital world provides the perfect
