self-disclosure, which is a building block in creating close personal
relationships.
To people with high self-esteem, rejection is part of life, not a reﬂection on
their self-worth. Conversely, people with low self-esteem are reluctant to
disclose personal information. eir inability to make self-disclosures serves as
a defense mechanism to guard against criticism and rejection. Self-disclosure is
the path to closer personal relationships; unfortunately, for a person with low
self-esteem it is the “path less traveled.” Ironically, it is the fear of self-disclosure
that can lead to the rejection a person with low self-esteem is trying to avoid.
A ﬁne line exists between self-esteem and arrogance. Arrogant people often
feel superior and set themselves apart from others. For this reason, they are
perceived as being “diﬀerent.” As a result, the probability of mutual attraction
is signiﬁcantly reduced, except with other arrogant individuals who share their
attitudes and behavior.
In American society, men and women often deﬁne self-worth in diﬀerent
ways. In the most general terms men derive a sense of self-esteem and social
status from their ability or potential ability to earn money, impress women,
and own high-priced objects like nice cars and real estate. Conversely, though
the American marketplace is experiencing a remarkable shift with more women
graduating from college than men, it is still true that many women gain a sense
of self-esteem and social status through displays of physical beauty,
youthfulness, and relationships with others. ese diﬀerences are evident when
game show hosts ask contestants to brieﬂy describe themselves. Male
contestants usually describe themselves by their occupations (“I am an
electricia n”), whereas, women characterize themselves by their relationships (“I
am a wife and mother of three children”). As more women work outside the
home, they, too, may begin to identify with their professions instead of their
relationships.
When it comes to establishing short- or long-term romantic relationships,
high-status women (young and physically attractive) tend to couple with high-
status men (high earning potential and disposable income). is pattern of
mate selection parallels typical mating strategies. Men select young and
physically attractive women to ensure procreation and women select high
earners with disposable incomes to achieve the security necessary to raise
children. Men with lower self-esteem tend to select women who are less
physically attractive and women with lower self-esteem tend to select mates
who are lower income earners and with less disposable income.
Sometimes lower-status individuals will try to “fake” higher status in an
attempt to establish relationships with people “out of their league.” For
example, a man might pretend to be a high-income earner by lavishing a
woman with expensive gifts, driving a car he cannot aﬀord, and spending
money he does not have. is strategy, although eﬀective in the short run,
usually ends catastrophically as time passes and the suitor, unable to aﬀord his
ruse, is unmasked and his true worth revealed.
DON’T BANK ON IT
One of my students told me of a common ruse that he and his friends often
employ on nights out. On the way to a bar, they will stop by a large bank’s
ATM and pick through dropped receipts until they ﬁnd ones that have
especially large balances printed on them. ese they pocket for later. en, if
the student or one of his friends meets a girl who is above his ﬁnancial
standing, he will casually write his phone number on the back of the purloined
receipt—creating the illusion that he is a wealthy man.
THE LAW OF AVAILABILITY (SCARCITY)
People are attracted to individuals and things they cannot readily obtain. In the
case with things, people are more attracted to a coveted object because it is out
of their reach. When the object of desire is ﬁnally gained, the attraction for the
object rapidly diminishes. Christmas presents provide a good example of this
phenomenon. Toys children wanted all year long are discarded several days
after they are retrieved from gift boxes under the tree. e Law of Availability
also holds true for human interaction, particularly in the early stages of a
developing relationship. e dating rule your mom swore by has scientiﬁc
merit. An individual should not always make him or herself readily available to
the person they are targeting for a longer-term relationship. A certain level of
unavailability will make you more of a mystery and a challenge.
