3. Cognitive Dissonance. Cognitive dissonance is triggered when a person holds two or more
conﬂicting beliefs simultaneously. When people experience cognitive dissonance, it is not
pleasant: ey become frustrated, angry, and experience psychological disequilibrium. In
Stacey’s situation, she unintentionally created cognitive dissonance in her manager. If Stacey is
right, then her manager is wrong. If Stacey is right, then she is smart and her manager is not so
smart. People experiencing cognitive dissonance have several options to regain their
equilibrium. In Stacey’s circumstances, her manager could admit that she is right and he is
wrong. Or he could try to convince Stacey that his method is correct and her method is not
viable. Finally, he could dismiss Stacey outright as an immature, well-meaning employee who
needs to be put in her place. Stacey’s manager chose the latter to resolve his dissonance. When
someone experiences cognitive dissonance, it rarely produces a positive outcome.
4. Ego. People are naturally egocentric; they think the world revolves around them. Stacey
demonstrated her self-focus when she used the “I” word. She elevated herself above her boss,
thus unintentionally attacking his ego. Faced with such a challenge, his thought process was
predictable. “I’ve been a manager for twenty years. Who does this inexperienced, snot-nosed
college graduate think she is? She needs to get some experience under her belt before prancing
into my oﬃce and telling me I’ve been doing things wrong for two decades. She needs to go
back to her cubicle and do as she is told.” In this instance, the manager’s ego trumped common
sense and the company’s all-important bottom line. Egos have hurt more people and torpedoed
more good ideas than one would care to admit.
LEARNING TO KEEP YOUR EGO IN CHECK
Instead of saying, “You’ve been manufacturing this chemical all wrong. I found
a new and cheaper way to do it,” Stacey should have employed psychologically
sound principles to shape her communication. A more appropriate way to
inform the boss of her signiﬁcant breakthrough would be:
“Sir, I would like your advice on something that would make our company
more proﬁtable.”
Addressing her manager as “Sir” shows respect and demonstrates that Stacey
sees her boss as a superior. e introductory phrase “I would like your advice
on something . . .” accomplishes ﬁve objectives. First, Stacey creates an
inclusionary environment. e manager feels as though he is included in the
process. Second, cognitive dissonance is avoided, thus increasing the
probability that the manager will be open to new ideas. ird, the manager’s
illusion of self-focus is bolstered. e manager will likely think, “Of course,
Stacey is seeking my advice because I am intelligent and I have twenty years of
experience behind me.” Fourth, this introductory phrase could foster a-  
mentor-mentee relationship. If this is achieved, then Stacey’s success also
becomes her manager’s success. Fifth, showing the manager respect and
acknowledging his expertise makes him feel good about himself. is brings
the Golden Rule of Friendship into play. “If you make other people feel good
about themselves, they will like you.”
People who like you are probably going to be more open to your
suggestions. e use of the words “our company” signals that Stacey has
emotional equity in the organization and is a team player. Her statement
“make our company more proﬁtable” is very appealing, especially if the
manager receives credit for an increased bottom line. When the manager gives
his advice, he takes partial ownership of the idea or proposed project. When
individuals feel as though they are part owners of a good idea or project, they
enthusiastically advance it.
THE GLORY ENCHILADA
e downside for Stacey in using the statement with her boss that we
recommend is that she must share the “glory enchilada” with him. At ﬁrst
glance, this might not seem fair or palatable since Stacey came up with the idea
and feels she should (rightfully) get all the credit. e problem is people
seldom take into account the beneﬁt of sharing the glory: goodwill. Glory has
a short expiration date; goodwill has a long shelf life. A good idea produces a
large plate that can be divided into many pieces. Freely distributing the pieces
increases likability, puts people in your debt, and gives you allies should you
need their help in gaining successes down the road.
THE CAT, THE RAT, AND THE METRONOME
Listening to what another person is saying can be diﬃcult to achieve,
particularly for extroverts. ey are so busy thinking about what they want to
say, interrupting the speaker, or letting their mind wander that they literally
don’t hear what is being said. Obviously, a person can’t respond eﬀectively to
another individual’s message if he or she doesn’t receive and process it. Is it
really possible that we can “block” out a person’s speech and not hear it? Yes.
is was demonstrated in an experiment conducted more than a half century
ago.
