young Grand Duke was a fairly open secret in her set; also, that she was
expecting him in London almost daily. Gradually I hinted that I knew the
young Grand Duke. As I gained her conﬁdence further, I invented
amorous aﬀairs for him and hinted to her about them. In this way, I
ﬁnally managed to induce her to talk. Subtly I instilled a vague
resentment against him, which was accentuated by his non-appearance in
London society up to now. His Highness having been kept away by his
Serene Uncle, the serene one having been cautioned to do so by me.
Two months passed before I was invited to the lady’s home in Mayfair
and by that time partly because I pretended to know the young Grand
Duke, I was on a more intimate footing. I had learned that she had met
him at a hunting party at the Earl of Crewes’ shooting box in Shropshire.
Later, she intimated that this was but their oﬃcial meeting and that their
acquaintance actually dated from a mountain trip she had taken to
Switzerland, the universal playground of royalty traveling incog. I learned
too that her heavy bridge gambling had cost her a lot of money.
e information that the lady was in debt did not come easily. To
obtain it, I had to work on her maid. Whenever the occasion arose, I
made it my business to tip the maid liberally. I contrived to do a number
of little things for her. Knowing the lady to be out, I called at the house
one day and while pretending to be waiting for my hostess, I put some
leading questions to the maid. I learned that her mistress was pressed for
money. at was an opening worth working on.
ereafter, I contrived to be present whenever there was a bridge party
at the lady’s. ey are pretty high gamblers, those English society women,
and I came to see that the lady was generally a heavy loser. It was my
good fortune for her to lose to me one night. Now, it is the custom at
these gatherings not to hand over cash; instead, the unlucky one pays
with what corresponds to an “on demand note.” I took her note that
night and with others—the whereabouts of which I learned from the
maid and which I indirectly purchased from the holders—I took all these
to a notorious money-lender and made a deal with him. He was to take
the notes and press the lady for payment, of course keeping my name out
of it. It is obvious that, trying, as I was to win her conﬁdence, I could not
go myself and hold these obligations over her head. at same day the
money-lender paid the lady a call. He paid her a good many other calls,
harassing her, threatening legal action and driving her until she was
almost to a state of nervous collapse. Well-placed sympathies soon made
her talk and she burst out pettishly that she was in debt and that most of
her acquaintances were in debt—nothing unusual in that set.
is was an opportune chance to be of material beneﬁt to the lady.
Seriously, we talked over her aﬀairs. I found them pretty well entangled.
We discussed the young Grand Duke. I gradually persuaded her that
there was no hope of a legitimate marriage with the house of
Mecklenburg-Schwerein, but because of her association with the young
Grand Duke and the fact that she had been betrothed to him, it was only
right that the Duchy provide her with some means of assistance. e ice
was perilously thin, for the lady is a high-spirited woman of ideals and I
had to be careful to word my language so that it would not appear as
though she were blackmailing. In justice to her, I believe that if she had
taken that view of it she would have dropped the entire matter and retired
from society for the season rather than go through with my plan. Finally,
I said, “Have you any means by which you could compel the ducal house
to make adequate acknowledgments and redresses to you?”
After a long hesitation, she jumped up, swept from the room, and
returned presently with a handful of letters. I saw on some of them the
Grand Duke’s coat of arms. e young fool had been careless enough for
that! She shook the letters in a temper and cried, “I wonder what Franz’s
uncle would say to these? Why I could compel him to marry me.”
Here was the chance. e iron—in this case my lady’s  temper—was
hot. I suggested that we sit down and talk it over. As an introductory
attack, to create the impression that I knew what I was talking about, I
hinted that I was connected with a leading family in Germany and that I
was in London incog. I approached the situation from the viewpoint that
I was her friend, not a friend of the house of Mecklenburg-Schwerein, bu t
that, by knowing them and their ways, I could be of great assistance to
her.
