disclosures while the other person continues to make superﬁcial disclosures is
not progressing and is likely to end.
WANT TO INCREASE THE LONGEVITY OF YOUR RELATIONSHIP?
Use the Hansel and Gretel approach. Hansel and Gretel, in the classic fairy
tale, set oﬀ into the woods, and to ensure that they can ﬁnd their way back,
they leave a trail of bread crumbs along the way. I recommend you use the
“bread crumb” approach to distributing information about yourself.
Relationships tend to wane over time. To increase the longevity of these
liaisons, release self-disclosures over an extended period of time.
Once somebody ﬁnds a person whom they can trust, they are often
tempted to open the emotional ﬂoodgates—telling too much too quickly—
overwhelming their partner in the process. Disclosures should be made over a
long period of time to ensure that the relationship slowly increases in intensity
and closeness. A steady trickle of information, like Hansel and Gretel’s bread
crumbs dropped one piece at a time, increases the longevity of the relationship
because each partner continually feels the closeness that comes with a steady
stream of self-disclosures.
Mutual self-disclosures create trust. People who make personal disclosures
become vulnerable to the person to whom the disclosures are made. Mutual
self-disclosures create a safety zone because each person has exposed their
vulnerabilities and tends to protect all the disclosures to avoid mutual
embarrassment resulting from a breach of trust.
Social network users tend to rely more on self-disclosures to create a sense
of closeness because they do not receive verbal and nonverbal cues that would
be otherwise exchanged in face-to-face communications. e veracity of
information exchanged online is suspect, thus forcing individuals online to
spend more time verifying information about each other. Once veracity has
been established, the lack of a physical presence increases the probability of
more intimate disclosures online, which in turn leads to the illusion of a closer
relationship.
THE LAW OF PERSONAL ATTRACTIVENESS
Attractiveness is a tangible beneﬁt for those who possess it. Even though it is
said that “beauty is in the eye of the beholder,” the reality is that every culture
has widely accepted standards of what is “attractive.” Although these standards
might change over time, most members of the culture internalize the
prevailing, current norm of what is considered beautiful or handsome.
Attractiveness is not “absolute.” You can become more attractive if you are
willing to put some eﬀort into achieving such a goal. According to Gordon
Wainwright, author of Teach Yourself Body Language, anyone can increase their
attractiveness to others if they maintain good eye contact, act upbeat, dress
well, add a dash of color to their wardrobe, and listen well. Wainwright also
stresses the importance of posture and bearing and suggests that for one week
you stand straight, tuck in your stomach, hold your head high, and smile at
those you meet. From the results of many experiments, Wainwright predicts
you will begin to be treated with more warmth and respect and start  attracting
more people to you.
Attractive people are seen as having more positive attributes. Good-looking
men and women are generally judged to be more talented, kind, honest, and
intelligent than their less attractive counter parts. Controlled studies show that
people go out of their way to help attractive people, of the same or opposite
sex, because they want to be liked and accepted by good-looking people.
Attractiveness can have ﬁnancial implications. On a scale of less attractive to
more attractive, less attractive people earn 5 to 10 percent less than individuals
of average looks, who in turn earned 3 to 8 percent less than those deemed
good-looking. Studies also show attractive students get more attention and
higher evaluations from their teachers. Good-looking patients get more
personalized care from their doctors, and attractive criminals receive lighter
sentences than less attractive lawbreakers. One need look no further than
Hollywood to see the impact beautiful movie stars have on our system of
justice.
THE LAW OF HUMOR
Individuals who use humor in social encounters are perceived as more likable.
In addition, both trust and attraction increase when a lighthearted approach is
