introverted customers time to think about your sales proposal. Introverts take
in information, mull it over, and then come to a decision. Pressing introverts
to reach a quick decision may force them to say no because they are not
comfortable making immediate decisions. Conversely, extroverts can be
pressured to some degree to buy your product “right now” because they are
more comfortable making impulsive decisions.
Rarely do people exhibit entirely extroverted or introverted characteristics.
Personality traits fall somewhere along a continuum. Some people actually
exhibit almost equal extroverted and introverted characteristics; however, most
people do have a preference for one or the other, and behave accordingly.
Introverts can act like extroverts when required to do so. If, for example, an
introvert has a job that requires them to be outgoing and gregarious, they can
do it, although it is more taxing to behave in such a manner than it would be if
they were natural extroverts. Moreover, when they are oﬀ the job, they return
to being introverts. ese contrasting lifestyles rarely conﬂict because a person’s
working world and private world normally don’t overlap.
e same can’t be said when it comes to personal relationships. If introverts
act like extroverts when they ﬁrst meet someone, the person they are seeing
often receives a shock if the relationship continues and the introvert reverts to
their “normal” behavior. Revealing your true personality when ﬁrst meeting
someone is far better than engaging in a Dr. Jekyll and Mr. Hyde approach
when you want to develop healthy, strong relationships.
THE LAW OF COMPLEMENTARITY (GIVING COMPLIMENTS)
People like to be complimented. It makes them feel good about themselves
and, according to the Golden Rule of Friendship, they are going to feel good
about you. e result: a better chance to make a friend or strengthen an
existing friendship.
Compliments, to be eﬀective, should be sincere and deserved. Paying
someone a compliment when you don’t really believe what you’re saying or
when the recipient of the compliment hasn’t earned the accolade is
counterproductive to good relationship building and is lying (the antithesis of
trust).
As author Steve Goodier notes: “Sincere compliments cost nothing and can
accomplish so much. In ANY relationship, they are the applause that
refreshes.” Use compliments when you get the opportunity; they work and are
an eﬀective tool in your friendship toolbox.
