Attempts to block the body or chest are a foe signal. You can send this
nonverbal message at the dinner table by placing or leaving a centerpiece
between yourself and the individual sitting across from you.
Barriers can be formed by the positioning of hands and feet or placing an
inanimate object between individuals. Some of the nonverbal behaviors and
inanimate objects that create barriers are listed below. When you see these
kinds of barriers, you can assume that good rapport has not been established
between the individuals involved.
Arm crossing provides a barrier. (The backward lean demonstrates a lack of rapport.)
ARM CROSSING
Arm crossing serves as a psychological barrier to protect individuals from
topics that cause them psychological anxiety. People who are in good rapport
do not feel threatened, nor do they feel anxious. If the person you are talking
to suddenly crosses his or her arms, then rapport has not yet been established
or it signals weakening rapport. People who feel uncomfortable with the
person they are talking to or the topic being discussed tend to cross their arms
over their chest.
BUILDING BARRIERS WITH INANIMATE OBJECTS
e placement of soft drink cans, pillows, purses, and other movable objects
between you and another person signals discomfort and a lack of rapport. A
woman who does not have good rapport with the person she is talking with
will often use her purse to create a barrier. is usually involves picking up her
purse from the ﬂoor and bringing it to her lap. is signals that rapport has
not yet been established or that the rapport is deteriorating.
PILLOW TALK
I explained the function of barriers to a new agent I was training. He was a
little skeptical about the eﬀectiveness of the technique until he interviewed a
particular witness. We interviewed the witness at her home. She sat on the
couch and we sat in two wing-backed chairs across from her. e new agent
asked the witness to provide a description of the suspect. e witness hesitated,
reached for a couch pillow, and placed it on her lap. e new agent gave me a
sideward glance to let me know that he had picked up on the nonverbal tell
that the witness was uncomfortable describing the suspect. e new agent
constructed an empathic statement. “Ma’am, you seem to be uncomfortable
about identifying the suspect.” “I sure am,” she admitted. “I don’t want that
guy coming back and hurting me.” e agent constructed a follow-up
empathic statement: “So, you’re worried about retribution.” “Yeah,” she sighed.
A change in the witness’s nonverbal language signaled a change in her
psychological disposition. Watching for subtle changes in people’s nonverbal
language often communicates more information than anything the person
might say.
e agent took the time to discuss the woman’s fear and gave her reasons
that her fear was unfounded. Once he was able to eliminate the witness’s fear
of retaliation, not surprisingly, she returned the couch pillow to the corner of
the couch. e connection between the new agent and the witness had been
reestablished.
PROLONGED EYE CLOSURE
