
CONTENTS
Introduction: The Like Switch: How to Turn People On to You
1 The Friendship Formula
2 Getting Noticed Before a Word Is Spoken
3 The Golden Rule of Friendship
4 The Laws of Attraction
5 Speaking the Language of Friendship
6 Building Closeness
7 Nurturing and Sustaining Long-Term Relationships
8 The Perils and Promise of Relationships in a Digital World
Epilogue: The Friendship Formula in Practice
Appendix
Acknowledgments
About the Authors
Bibliography
Index
To my wife, Helen, a woman overﬂowing with love, strength of
character, and, above all, patience for enduring my antics for over three
decades of marriage.
JACK SCHAFER
To my wife, Edyth, and daughter, Amber: for who you are, for what
you’ve accomplished, for your love that has enriched so many lives.
MARVIN KARLINS
THE LIKE SWITCH
How to Turn People On to You
When you hear “FBI,” you likely don’t think the Friendly Bureau of
Investigation. But my twenty years as an agent specializing in behavioral
analysis enhanced my ability to quickly read people and gave me a unique
understanding of human nature and shared human behaviors. And my work,
which ranged from convincing people to spy on their own country to
identifying perpetrators and convincing them to confess, allowed me to
develop many incredibly powerful methods for getting people to trust me,
often without me saying a word. In my role as behavioral analyst for the FBI’s
Behavioral Analysis Program, I developed strategies to recruit spies and make
friends out of sworn foes. In other words, I developed speciﬁc skills and
techniques that could turn an enemy of the United States into a friend who
was willing to become a spy for America.
My profession boiled down to getting people to like me. My work with
“Vladimir” (I have changed the names and identifying characteristics of those I
discuss and have created some composites to best illustrate what my work has
demonstrated) illustrates this point well.
Vladimir had illegally entered the United States to commit espionage. He
was caught in possession of classiﬁed defense documents. As an FBI Special
Agent, I was assigned to interview Vladimir. At our ﬁrst meeting he made a
vow not to speak to me under any circumstances. I then began the process of
countering his deﬁance by simply sitting opposite him and reading a
newspaper. But at a carefully planned time, I deliberately folded the newspaper
and left without saying a word. Day after day and week after week I sat across
from him and read the newspaper while he remained mute, handcuﬀed to a
nearby table.
Finally, he asked why I kept coming daily to see him. I folded the
newspaper, looked at him, and said, “Because I want to talk to you.” I
immediately returned the newspaper to the upright position and continued
reading, ignoring Vladimir. After a while, I got up and left without saying
another word.
On the following day, Vladimir again asked me why I came every day and
read the newspaper. I again told him that I came because I wanted to talk to
him. I sat down and opened the newspaper. A few minutes later, Vladimir said,
“I want to talk.” I put the newspaper down and said, “Vladimir, are you sure
you want to talk to me? When we ﬁrst met, you told me that you would never
speak to me.” Vladimir replied, “I want to talk to you, but not about spying.” I
agreed to this condition but added, “You will let me know when you are ready
to talk about your spying activitie s, won’t you?” Vladimir agreed.
Over the next month, Vladimir and I talked about everything except his
spying activities . en, one afternoon, Vladimir announced, “I’m ready to talk
about what I did.” Only then did we ﬁnally speak in great detail about his
espionage activit ies. Vladimir spoke freely and honestly not because he was
forced to talk, but because he liked me and considered me his friend.
e interrogation techniques I used with Vladimir may, at ﬁrst glance, seem
to make little sense . . . but everything I did was carefully orchestrated to
achieve Vladimir’s eventual confession and cooperation. In e Like Switch, I
will reveal the secrets of how I won Vladimir over and how, using the same
techniques, you can get anyone to like you for the moment or for a lifetime. I
can do this because it turns out that the same social skills I developed to
befriend and recruit spies are equally eﬀective in developing successful
friendships at home, at work, or anywhere else that personal interactions take
place.
At ﬁrst, I did not see this one-to-one crossover from my ﬁeldwork to
everyday life. In fact, it was initially brought to my attention near the end of
my career with the FBI. At that time I was teaching classes to young
intelligence oﬃcers on how to recruit spies. On the ﬁrst day of a new class I
arrived a half hour early to set up the room for a group exercise. To my
surprise, two students were already there. I didn’t recognize them. ey sat
quietly in the front row with their hands folded on their desks and a look of
anticipation on their faces. Considering the time of day and the fact that most
students were not known for arriving early to class, I wondered what was going
on. I asked them who they were and why they had decided to show up at such
an early hour.
“Do you remember Tim from your previous class?” one of the students
asked.
“Yes,” I said.
“Several weeks ago the two of us went to a bar with Tim. He told us about
your lecture on inﬂuence and rapport building.”
“And . . . ?”  I still didn’t see where this was leading.
“Tim bragged that he learned in class how to pick up ladies.”
“Obviously, we were skeptical,” said the second student.
“So we put him to the test,” the ﬁrst student continued. “We picked a
random woman who was in the club and challenged Tim to get her to come to
our table and have a drink with us, without saying a word.”
“What did he do?” I inquired.
“He took us up on the challenge,” the student exclaimed. “We thought he
was nuts. But then, about forty-ﬁve minutes later, the woman came over to our
table and asked if she could join us for a drink. We still ﬁnd it hard to believe,
and we saw it happen.”
I gave the students a quizzical look. “Do you know how he did it?”
“No!” exclaimed one of them. And then, in unison, both of them said,
“at’s what we came here to learn!”
My ﬁrst reaction to their comments was to assert the professionalism
expected of me, and I told them the purpose of the classroom training was to
teach students to be eﬀective intelligence oﬃcers, not pickup artists. It was my
second reaction that took me by surprise, an epiphany of sorts. inking of
Tim’s antics, I suddenly realized that the same techniques used to recruit spies
could be employed to become a victor in the so-called dating game. Even more
important, in a broader sense, these techniques could be used whenever a
person wants to win anyone over in virtually any personal interaction. It was
that realization that served as the launchpad for this book and all the
information contained within it.
After retiring from the FBI, I went on to get my doctorate in psychology
and a university teaching position. It was during this phase of my life that I
ﬂeshed out my Like Switch strategies to help you achieve successful
interpersonal relationships at home, at work, or anywhere else person-to-
person interaction is involved. For example:
• New salespeople can use the techniques presented in this book to establish a clientele list from
scratch.
• Experienced salespeople can also beneﬁt from learning how to maintain or enhance existing
relationships as well as from developing additional clients.
• All levels and types of employees, from managers at Wall Street ﬁrms to restaurant waitstaﬀ, can
use these tactics to interact more eﬀectively with their supervisors, colleagues, subordinates,
and customers.
• Parents can use the strategies to repair, maintain, and strengthen their relationships with their
children.
• Consumers can use this information to get better service, better deals, and better personalized
attention.
• And, of course, people seeking friends or romantic relationships can use these social skills to
overcome this inherently diﬃcult experience (made even more challenging in our digitally
focused society).
e Like Switch is for anyone seeking to make new friends, to maintain or
enhance existing relationships, to make brief encounters with people more
enjoyable, or to get better tips and bonuses.
CONQUERING THE FRIENDSHIP CHALLENGE
Human beings are social animals. As a species, we are hardwired to seek out
others. is desire is rooted in our primitive beginnings, when togetherness
gave us the best chance to move up the food chain as we emerged from our
caves and struggled for survival in a hostile and unforgiving world. us, one
would assume that making friends would be easy, even automatic. Sadly, this
isn’t so. In poll after poll, study after study, an increasing number of people
report feeling isolated and incapable of developing rudimentary, let alone
meaningful, long- lasting relationships. is problem has grown worse with the
introduction of social media, which further distances us from face-to-face,
meaningful social interaction.
Dealing with people, particularly with individuals you don’t know, can be a
challenging, even scary, experience. Whether you are a man or a woman
doesn’t seem to matter. e fear is there: fear of embarrassment, fear of
rejection, fear of causing hurt feelings, fear of making a bad impression, even
the fear of being used or taken advantage of. e good news is that
relationships don’t have to be an invitation to disaster. If you are struggling
with friendship issues or just want to improve the friendships you already have,
take heart. You are not alone and your situation is not hopeless. is book is
designed to allay your concerns about interacting with others at work, at
home, with strangers, or with loved ones.
e techniques presented in this book provide you with the best possible
chance, based on the latest scientiﬁc evidence, to get people to like you,
without saying a word. Eventually, though, you have to speak to people. Words
translate the initial feelings of goodwill into friendships and, in some cases,
lifelong relationships. is book presents the nonverbal cues along with the
verbal prompts that can get anyone to like you instantly.
Rewarding personal relationships are within your reach. It’s not a matter of
guesswork or luck. It is the result of using proven scientiﬁc knowledge and
techniques in dealing with other individuals. e opportunity to make friends
is three steps away:
1. You must be willing to learn and master the techniques presented in this book. e techniques are
similar to the power tools used by construction workers. e key is to let the tools do the work.
When I was young, I routinely used a handsaw to cut wood. One day my father let me use his
newly purchased circular saw. I took the power saw in hand and began to cut a piece of wood.
I applied the same pressure to the power saw that I would have applied to a hand saw. My
father tapped me on the shoulder and told me to ease up on the pressure and let the saw do the
work. e techniques in this book are based on similarly sound principles. Simply apply the
techniques and relax, be yourself, and let the techniques do the work. You will be amazed at
the results.
2. You must actually use this new knowledge in dealing with people in your everyday life. Knowing the
best way to do something is great, but only when you actually utilize what you have learned.
Always remember that knowledge without action is knowledge wasted.
3. You need to constantly practice what you have learned. Friendship skills are like skills in general.
e more you use them, the more proﬁcient you become; the less you use them, the quicker
you lose them. If you are willing to take these three steps, you will ﬁnd that making friends
becomes as automatic as breathing.
e Like Switch is within your reach. To ﬂip it on, just utilize the
information you’ll be learning in the following pages and watch your LQ
(Likability Quotient) soar.
1
THE FRIENDSHIP FORMULA
I’ve learned that people will forget what you said, people will forget what you did, but people will
never forget how you made them feel.
—MAYA ANGELOU
OPERATION SEAGULL
His code name was Seagull.
He was a highly placed foreign diplomat.
He could be a valuable asset if he became a spy for the United States.
e problem was, how do you convince somebody to pledge their
allegiance to an opposing country? e answer was to befriend Seagull and
make him an oﬀer too tempting to refuse. e key to this strategy involved
patience, painstaking intelligence gathering about every facet of Seagull’s life,
and a way to foster a relationship with an American counterpart he could trust.
A background investigation of Seagull revealed that he had been passed over
for promotion several times and was overheard telling his wife that he liked
living in America and would consider retiring there if that were possible.
Seagull was also concerned his country’s small pension would be insuﬃcient to
provide him with a comfortable retirement. Armed with this knowledge,
security analysts believed Seagull’s allegiance to his country could be
compromised if he was oﬀered the proper ﬁnancial incentives.
e challenge became how to get close enough to Seagull to make him a
ﬁnancial deal without “spooking” him. e FBI operative, Charles, was told to
slowly and systematically grow a relationship with Seagull, like aging a ﬁne
wine to bring out its best ﬂavor, to a point where the time was ripe to approach
him with an oﬀer. e agent was told if he moved too fast it was likely that
Seagull would go “shields up” and avoid him completely. Instead, he was
instructed to orchestrate his approach, using behavioral strategies designed to
establish friendships. e ﬁrst step was to get Seagull to like Charles before
they exchanged a single word. e second step was to use the appropriate
verbal prompts to translate that goodwill into a lasting friendship.
e preparation for the critica l ﬁrst encounter with Seagull started many
months before the actual meeting took place. Surveillance had determined that
Seagull routinely left his embassy compound once a week and walked two
blocks to the corner grocery store to shop. Armed with this information,
Charles was instructed to station himself at various locations along Seagull’s
route to the store. He was warned never to approach Seagull or threaten him in
any way; instead he was to simply “be there” so Seagull could see him.
As a trained intelligence oﬃcer, it was not long before Seagull took notice of
the FBI agent, who, by the way, made no eﬀort to conceal his identity. Because
Charles made no move to intercept or speak with his target, Seagull did not
feel threatened and became accustomed to seeing the American on his trips to
the store.
After several weeks of being in the same vicinity together, Seagull made eye
contact with the American operative. Charles nodded his head, acknowledging
Seagull’s presence, but showed no further interest in him.
More weeks passed and, as they did, Charles increased his nonverbal
interaction with Seagull by increasing his eye contact, raising his eyebrows,
tilting his head, and jutting out his chin, which are all nonverbal signs that
scientists have discovered are interpreted by the human brain as “friend
signals.”
Two months elapsed before Charles made his next move. He followed
Seagull into the grocery store he routinely visited, but kept his distance from
the foreign diplomat. With each new trip to the store, Charles continued to
enter the grocery as well, still maintaining space between himself and Seagull
but increasing the number of times he passed the diplomat in the aisles and
increasing the duration of visual contact with him. He noted that Seagull
bought a can of peas on each of his shopping excursions. With this new
information, Charles waited a few additional weeks and then, on one occasion,
followed Seagull into the store as he usually did, but this time to introduce
himself to Seagull. As the foreign diplomat reached for a can of peas, Charles
reached for the can next to it, turned to Seagull, and said, “Hi, my name is
Charles and I’m a Special Agent with the FBI.” Seagull smiled and said, “I
thought so.” From that ﬁrst innocuous meeting, Charles and Seagull developed
a close friendship. Seagull eventually agreed to assist his new FBI friend by
regularly providing him with classiﬁed information.
A casual observer, watching the many months’ wooing of Seagull, might
wonder why it took so long for the ﬁrst meeting to take place. It was not by
accident. In fact, the entire Seagull recruitment strategy was a carefully
choreographed psychological operation designed to establish a bond of
friendship between two men who would, under normal circumstances, never
contemplate such a relationship.
As a member of the FBI’s Behavioral Analysis Program, I was assigned,
along with my colleagues, the task of orchestrating the recruitment scenario for
Seagull. Our objective was to get Seagull comfortable enough with Charles,
our FBI operative, so that a ﬁrst meeting could take place and, hopefully,
would be followed by future meetings if Charles could make a good impression
on Seagull. Our task was made more diﬃcult because Seagull was a highly
trained intelligence oﬃcer who would be constantly on the alert for any person
who might arouse his suspicion, and which would result in his avoidance of
that individual at all costs.
For Charles to have a successful face-to-face ﬁrst meeting with Seagull, the
foreign operative would have to be psychologically comfortable with his
American counterpart. And for that to happen, Charles would have to take
speciﬁc steps, which, it turned out, he successfully achieved. e steps Charles
was required to follow in winning Seagull over are the same ones you must
take if you want to develop either short- or long-term friendships.
Using the Seagull case as a backdrop, let’s examine the steps Charles
successfully completed to recruit his target using the Friendship Formula.
THE FRIENDSHIP FORMULA
e Friendship Formula consists of the four basic building blocks: proximity,
frequency, duration, and intensity. ese four elements can be expressed using
the following mathematical formula:
Friendship =Proximity + Frequency + Duration + Intensity
Proximity is the distance between you and another individual and your
exposure to that individual over time. In the Seagull case, Charles didn’t
simply walk up to Seagull and introduce himself. Such behavior would have
resulted in Seagull’s rapid departure from the scene. e conditions of the case
required a more measured approach, one that allowed Seagull time to “get
used” to Charles and not view him as a threat. To achieve this end, the
friendship factor of proximity was employed. Proximity serves as an essential
element in all personal relationships. Just being in the same vicinity as your
recruitment target is critica l to the development of a personal relationship.
Proximity predisposes your recruitment target to like you and promotes
mutual attraction. People who share physical space are more likely to become
attracted to one another, even when no words are exchanged.
e key to the power of proximity is that it must take place in a
nonthreatening environment. If a person feels threatened by someone being
too close, they go “shields up” and take evasive action to move away from that
person. In the Seagull scenario, Charles was proximal to his target, but he kept
a safe distance to prevent him from perceiving Charles as a potential danger
and consequently triggering a “ﬁght or ﬂight” response.
Frequency is the number of contacts you have with another individual
over time and Duration is the length of time you spend with another
individual over time. As time passed, Charles employed the second and third
friendship factors: Frequency and Duration. He did this by positioning
himself on Seagull’s shopping route in a manner that increased the number of
instances (frequency) where the foreign diplomat saw him. After several
months, he added duration to the mix by spending longer periods of time
around Seagull. He did this by following his target into the grocery store,
thereby extending the contact tim e between them.
Intensity is how strongly you are able to satisfy another person’s
psychological and/or physical needs through the use of verbal and
nonverbal behaviors. e ﬁnal factor in the Friendship Formula, Intensity,
was achieved gradually over time as Seagull became more and more aware of
Charles’s presence and the FBI agent’s seemingly unexplainable reluctance to
approach him. is introduced one type of intensity, curiosity, into the mix.
When a new stimulus is introduced into a person’s environment (in this case a
stranger enters Seagull’s world), the brain is hardwired to determine if that new
stimulus pre sents a threat or a perceived threat. If the new stimulus is judged
to be a threat, the person will attempt to eliminate or neutralize it by
employing the ﬁght or ﬂight response. If, on the other hand, the new stimulus
is not perceived as a threat, then it becomes the object of curiosity. e person
wants to learn more about the new stimulus: What is it? Why is it there? Can I
use it to my beneﬁt?
Charles’s activitie s were conducted at a safe distance and, over time, became
the object of Seagull’s curiosity. is curiosity motivated Seagull to discover
who Charles was and what he wanted.
Seagull later told Charles that he knew he was an FBI agent the ﬁrst time he
saw him. Whether this was true or not, Seagull received the nonverbal “friend”
signals the FBI agent was sending him.
Once Seagull determined that Charles was an FBI agent, his curiosity
increased. He certainly knew he was a target of recruitment, but for what
purpose and at what price? Since Seagull was already unhappy with his career
advancement and looming retirement, he no doubt thought about diﬀerent
scenarios involving Charles, including working as a spy for the FBI.
e decision to become a spy is not made overnight. Potential spies need
time to develop their own rationalization strategies and time to grow
accustomed to switching their allegiance. e recruitment strategy for Seagull
included a length of time for the seed of betrayal to germinate. Seagull’s
imagination provided the necessary nutrients for the idea to mature and
bloom. is latency period also provided time for Seagull to convince his wife
to join him. As Charles moved physically closer to Seagull, the diplomat did
not see the FBI agent as a pending threat but rather as a symbol of hope—
hope for a better life in the years to come.
Once Seagull made up his mind to assist the FBI, he had to wait for
Charles to approach him. Seagull later told Charles that the wait was
excruciating. His curiosity peaked. “Why wasn’t the American operative
making a move?” In fact, the second thing Seagull said to Charles when he
ﬁnally introduced himself at the grocery store was “What took you so long?”
FREQUENCY AND DURATION
Duration has a unique quality in that the more time you spend with a person,
the more inﬂuence they have over your thoughts and actions. Mentors who
spend a lot of time with their mentees exercise a positive inﬂuence over them.
People who have less than honorable intentions can negatively inﬂuence the
people they spend time with. e best example of the power of duration is
between parents and their children. e more time parents spend with their
children, the more likely the parents will be able to inﬂuence them. If parental
duration is lacking, the children tend to spend more time with their friends,
including, in extreme cases, gang members. ese people now have a greater
inﬂuence on children because they spend most of their time with them.
Duration shares an inverse relationship with frequency. If you see a friend
frequently, then the duration of the encounter will be shorter. Conversely, if
you don’t see your friend very often, the duration of your visit will typically
increase signiﬁcantly. For example, if you see a friend every day, the duration of
your visits can be low because you can keep up with what’s going on as events
unfold. If, however, you only see your friend twice a year, the duration of your
visits will be greater. ink back to a time when you had dinner in a restaurant
with a friend you hadn’t seen for a long period of time. You probably spent
several hours catching up on each other’s lives. e duration of the same
dinner would be considerably shorter if you saw the person on a regular basis.
Conversely, in romantic relationships the frequency and duration are very high
because couples, especially newly minted ones, want to spend as much time
with each other as possible. e intensity of the relationship will also be very
high.
RELATIONSHIP SELF-EVALUATION
ink back to the beginning of your current relationship or a relationship you
had in the past; you should now be able to see that it developed in accordance
with the elements of the Friendship Formula. e Formula can also be used to
identify the parts of a relationship that need improvement. For example, a
couple who has been married for several years senses that their relationship is
deteriorating, but they don’t know how to ﬁx it. eir relationship can be self-
evaluated by looking at the interaction of each of the elements of the
Friendship Formula. e ﬁrst element to look at is proximity. Does the couple
share the same space or are they separately pursuing their own goals and rarely
sharing physical space together? e second element is frequency. Do they
frequently share time together? e third element is duration. How much time
do they spend together when they do see each other? e fourth element is
intensity, the glue that holds relationships together. e couple may have
proximity, frequency, and duration, but lack intensity. An example of this
combination is a couple who spends a lot of time at home watching television
together, but do not interact with any emotion. is relationship can be
improved if the couple increases the intensity of their relationship. ey could
go out on “date nights” to rekindle the feelings they felt for each other when
they ﬁrst met. ey could shut the television oﬀ for a few hours each night and
talk to each other, thus intensifying their relationship.
e combinations of the four elements of the Friendship Formula are
seemingly endless, depending on how couples interact with each another. In
many instances, one member in the relationship travels on business most of the
year. e lack of proximity can adversely aﬀect the relationship because it often
leads to reduced frequency, duration, and intensity. e lack of proximity can
be overcome with technology. Frequency, duration, and intensity can be
maintained with the help of email, chatting, texting, Skyping, and social
media.
Once you know the basic elements of all relationships, you will be able to
evaluate existing ones and nurture new ones by consciously regulating the four
relationship elements. To practice relationship self-evaluations, examine the
relationships you are in right now and see how the four basic elements are
playing a role in aﬀecting them. If you want to strengthen a relationship, think
of ways to regulate the Friendship Formula to achieve the desired outcome.
You can also extrica te yourself from unwanted relationships by slowly
decreasing each of the basic elements of the Friendship Formula. is gradual
decrease will let the unwanted person down incrementally without hurting
their feelings and without seeming like an abrupt break in the relationship. In
most cases, the unwanted person will naturally come to the conclusion that the
relationship is no longer viable and seek more rewarding interactions.
RECRUITING SPIES USING A SILENT PARTNER
Imagine you are a scientist, with a top-secret clearance, working as a contractor
for the Department of Defense. One day, seemingly out of nowhere, you
receive a telephone call from a government oﬃcial from the Chinese embassy.
He invites you to come to China to give a lecture on some of your unclassiﬁed
research. All your expenses will be paid by the Chinese government. You report
this invitation to your security oﬃcer, who tells you that you can give a lecture
in China as long as you don’t discuss classiﬁed information. You call to conﬁrm
your attendance and the Chinese oﬃcial invites you to come a week earlier so
you can do some sightseeing. You agree. You are very excited because this is a
once-in-a-lifetime opportunity.
You are met at the airport by a representative from the Chinese
government, who informs you that he will be your guide and translator for
your entire trip. Each morning the translator meets you at your hotel and has
breakfast with you. You spend all day sightseeing. e translator buys all your
meals and arranges some evening social activities. e translator is friendly and
shares information about his family and social activities . You reciprocate by
sharing information about your family, nothing important, just the names of
your wife and children, their birthdays, your wedding anniversary, and the
holidays you and your family celebrate. As the days go by, you are amazed that
you and your translator have so much in common despite stark cultural
diﬀerences.
e day of the lecture arrives. e lecture hall is ﬁlled to capacity. Your
lecture is well received. At the end of the lecture, one of the participants
approaches you and says he is very interested in your research. He comments
that your research is fascinating and innovative. He poses a question relating to
the work he has been doing that relates to your research. e answer requires
you to reveal sensitive but not classiﬁed information. You gladly provide the
information along with a lengthy explanation even though it borders on the
classiﬁed realm.
While you are waiting to board your plane back to the United States, your
translator informs you that your lecture was a tremendous success and the
Chinese government would like to invite you back next year to present another
lecture. Since the small lecture hall was ﬁlled to capacity, you will be speaking
in the Grand Ballroom next year. (e Chinese translator presented an
opportunity for the scientist to ﬂatter himself, which is the most powerful
form of ﬂattery. is technique of ﬂattery will be discussed later.) Oh, and by
the way, your wife is invited to accompany you, all expenses paid.
As an FBI counterintelligence oﬃcer, I was required to debrief scientists
who went overseas to determine if they were approached by foreign
intelligence oﬃcers seeking classiﬁed information. I interviewed many
scientists who described similar stories to the one above. All the scientists
reported that the Chinese were impeccable hosts and never asked about any
classiﬁed information. No foul play. Case closed.
e one thing that bothered me was the scientists’ comments that they had
so much in common with their translators. Given the cultural diﬀerences, this
piqued my curiosity. I knew that establishing “common ground” was the
quickest way to develop rapport. (is “common ground” technique to build
rapport will be discussed in Chapter 2.)
I then used the Friendship Formula to further evaluate the scientists’ visits
to China. Certainly, proximity was present. Frequency was low, for the
scientists only went to China once a year. If frequency is low then duration
must be high in order to develop a personal relationship. Duration was high.
e same translator met the scientists early every morning and spent the entire
day and evening with them. Based on the topics of the translators’ discussions
with the scientists, intensity was high. It ﬁnally dawned on me. e scientists
were being recruited but they didn’t know it and neither did I up to that point.
e scientists and, for a while, I myself, did not see the re cruitment eﬀort.
e Chinese, knowingly or unknowingly, used the Friendship Formula, which
describes the way people naturally develop friendships. Because it is a natural
process, the brain does not attend to this subtle recruitment technique. From
that time forward, I interviewed scientists using the Friendship Formula to
determine if any recruitment attempts by foreign intelligence services took
place. I speciﬁcally asked the scientist to describe the proximity, frequency,
duration, and intensity with any people they met during their trips. I also
briefed the scientists before they went to China to be aware of the subtle
techniques the Chinese use to steal our secrets.
THE FRIENDSHIP FORMULA AND YOU
roughout the rest of this book, the Friendship Formula will be used as the
foundation upon which friendships are built. Regardless of what type of
friendship you desire (short, long, relaxed, or intense) it will always be
inﬂuenced by proximity, frequency, duration, and intensity. ink of the
Friendship Formula as the concrete foundation upon which a house is built.
e home can take many diﬀerent forms, just like friendships can, but the
foundation remains basically the same.
APPLYING THE FRIENDSHIP FORMULA IN EVERYDAY LIFE
I met Phillip, the son of a close friend, at a local coﬀee shop. Phillip had
recently graduated from a small-town college and landed his ﬁrst job in Los
Angeles. He was single and wanted to make new friends. He had lived his
entire life in small towns but suddenly found himself in a big city, where
making friends seemed like a daunting task.
I advised him to routinely frequent a bar near his apartment and display
friend signals as he entered to send the message he was not a threat (friend
signals are introduced in the next chapter), and to sit alone at the bar, a table,
or a booth.
His daily visits to the bar would allow proximity to take hold, and his
constant appearances would allow for frequency and duration to be
established. With each visit, he could gradually increase intensity, the ﬁnal
component of the Friendship Formula, by looking at other customers a little
longer and smiling. Phillip needed a curiosity hook to draw people to him.
Phillip told me he was an antique marble collector. I instructed him to bring a
magnifying glass and a bag of marbles with him each time he visited the bar. I
further instructed him to set the marbles on the bar and thoughtfully examine
each one with the magnifying glass. is activity would serve as a curiosity
hook. I also told him to build good rapport with the bartender and servers
because they would become his ambassadors to the members in the
community. Because the bartender and servers had direct contact with Phillip,
other customers would naturally ask them who the new person was. When
they did, they would say nice things about Phillip, which in turn would form a
primacy ﬁlter through which the other customers would view Phillip. (Primacy
ﬁlters will be discussed in the next chapter.)
Several weeks later, Phillip telephoned me and reported that I was right.
e ﬁrst time he visited the bar he ordered a drink, laid out the marbles, and
examined them one by one with the magnifying glass. A few minutes after the
bartender served Phillip his drink, he asked him about his unusual activity .
Phillip told the bartender brieﬂy about his marble collection and noted the
diﬀerences in size, color, and texture of each marble. After several visits to the
bar, Phillip and the bartender became better acquainted.
e bartender liked Phillip and introduced him to several people who were
obviously interested in his quirky hobby. e marbles served as a conversation
starter and made the transition to other topics eﬀortless.
e Friendship Formula looks like magic, but it is not. It just mirrors the
way people normally form relationships. And knowing the basic elements of
friendship development makes building friendships easy.
HOW VLADIMIR WAS INFLUENCED BY THE FRIENDSHIP FORMULA
Remember that Vladimir had initially vowed to not speak to me. e ﬁrst
thing I did was to establish proximity. Every day I sat with him and read the
newspaper, not saying a word, virtually ignoring him. is silent activity
established proximity, but, more important, did not pose a threat. Once
Vladimir determined that I was not a threat, he became curious. Why does this
agent come each day? What is his purpose? Why doesn’t he say anything to
me? My daily visits and silent reading activity served as a curiosity hook.
Overcome with curiosity, Vladimir eventually broke his silence and made the
ﬁrst move to establish contact. Speaking with me was no longer my idea; it
became his. Vladimir took the initiative. Even then, I did not immediately
begin talking with him; instead, I reminded him that when we ﬁrst met, he
vowed never to talk. In addition to the Friendship Formula, this introduced
two psychological principles that will be discussed later in the book, “the
principle of scarcity” and the “principle of increased restraint increases drive.”
In simple terms, I did not readily make myself available to Vladimir, which
heightened his curiosity, causing an increase in his motivation to talk. Once
Vladimir opened his personal and psychological space to me, I was able to use
the rapport-building techniques discussed throughout this book to bring him
to the point where he willingly provided me with information.
To eﬀectively use the Friendship Formula, you have to keep in mind what
kind of relationship you are looking to establish and the time you will be
required to spend with your person of interest. Obviously, the formula will not
play a major role in getting someone to like you if you are only going to see
them once or sporadically. To illustrate: Say you’re in Cleveland, Ohio, for a
one-day conference and you meet this particularly attractive man or woman
(you choose which is appropriate) and want to spend the evening with him or
her. When you give the person a friend signal, it is not reciprocated; in fact,
the person goes “shields up.” At this point, you’re not going to get anywhere
with this individual; not tonight, anyway. But, according to the Friendship
Formula, if you end up moving to Cleveland, you might still be able to win
this person over using proximity, frequency, duration, and intensity to develop
a relationship.
THE FRIEND-FOE CONTINUUM
When two people meet each other for the ﬁrst time (assuming neither person
knows anything about the other person), they are strangers. Imagine yourself
walking down the street in a town where you don’t know anybody and people
are moving around you as they head toward their destinations. Or think of
yourself in a bar or restaurant or other public building where you are among
dozens of people unfamiliar to you. In these cases, you are in the “stranger”
zone of the continuum. You are a stranger to those around you, as they are
strangers to you.
Most human interactions remain in the stranger zone. We hardly take
notice of the hundreds, even thousands, of personal contacts we experience in
our daily lives as we go about our business. Yet, sometimes a stranger does
something that makes us take notice of his or her presence; we become aware
of this individual. It doesn’t have to be something obvious. In fact, at ﬁrst we
might not even understand why a particular person has “caught our attention.”
So, what makes a stranger suddenly stand out and become a person of
interest? ey have been picked up by, for lack of a better name, your brain’s
territory scan. Scientists have discovered that as we go about our daily lives, our
senses are constantly sending messages to our brain, which, in turn, processes
the information to assess, among other things, if any given individual in our
range of observation can be ignored, is worthy of approach, or is someone to
avoid. is process is automatic or “hardwired” into our brains and is based on
the brain’s capacity to interpret speciﬁc nonverbal and verbal behaviors as
either “friend,” “neutral,” or “foe” signals.
e function of the “territory scan” can be described using the following
analogy. A woman is walking up and down a stretch of oceanfront beach. As
she moves, she holds a metal detector in front of her, sweeping it left to right,
side to side. Most of her walk is uninterrupted; the metal detector has not
“picked up” anything of interest lying beneath the sand. But, every so often,
the machine will beep and the woman will stop and dig in the sand to discover
what is buried there. What she ﬁnds might be treasure . . . an expensive watch
or a valuable coin. Or it could be trash . . . a discarded can or tin foil. If she is
extremely unlucky, it could be some long-forgotten land mine just waiting to
be detonated.
Your brain is like the metal detector, constantly evaluating your
environment for signals that indicate things you should approach or avoid, or
that are irrelevant and can be ignored. Behavioral scientists have spent decades
discovering, cataloging, and describing the kinds of human behaviors the brain
interprets as “friend” or “foe” signals. Once you know what the signals are, you
will be able to use them to make friends and, as a collateral beneﬁt, keep
people away from you that you would like to avoid.
FOR RENT, FOR LEASE, OR NOT FOR SALE SIGNS
One of my students reported to the class that she started picking up interesting
nonverbal signals at her local bar. She frequently observed that men in
exclusively committed relationships sent out diﬀerent signals than those men
in committed relationships who were seemingly seeking extra-relationship
aﬀairs. e student commented that she could sense strong nonverbal foe
signals from some of the married men that discouraged unwanted personal
attention. But other supposedly committed men were sending out strong
friend signals that they were seeking something extra. e student noted that
these friend signals were more subtle than the friend signals transmitted by
unattached men.
THE URBAN SCOWL
Have you ever wondered why one individual seems to have the “knack” when
it comes to attracting others, making a good impression, and getting people to
like him or her, while another person, who is equally attractive and successful
in life, can’t seem to duplicate that “magnetic appeal”? It often comes down to
unconsciously sending oﬀ “foe” signals. Another student presented me with
(unfortunately for her) a great example of this. She mentioned that she was
having trouble making friends at the Midwestern college where I teach. She
said that people often remarked that she appeared cold, aloof, and
unapproachable, but that once they got to know her, she had little diﬃculty
developing close relationships with them.
As we talked, I found out she grew up in a tough and dangerous
neighborhood in Atlanta, where she had to learn from a young age to have a
very thick skin. I told her that she didn’t need to improve her communication
skills, but instead, all she had to do was change the way she presented herself to
people. She hadn’t stopped showing her “urban scowl” to the world. is is not
uncommon for people who grow up in rough neighborhoods or even just large
cities . e urban scowl sends a clear, nonverbal signal to others that you are a
foe, not a friend. It is a warning to stay away and “don’t screw with me.”
Predators are less likely to target people who project this urban scowl, so it
becomes a valuable survival tool in tough neighborhoods. Once she makes a
concerted eﬀort to send out more “friend” than “foe” signals she will have little
trouble connecting with other students.
An urban scowl.
Would you want to approach the person who is pictured wearing an urban
scowl? Keep in mind that many people who exhibit this expression are totally
unaware they are displaying foe signals that discourage others from interacting
with them. at is why an understanding of what constitutes appropriate
verbal and nonverbal friend signals is so critical.
WHEN TO SEND FOE SIGNALS
Street people are constantly seeking handouts, especially in big cities. ey can
be persistent. eir persistence is not random, though. ey target people who
are most likely to give them money, and aggressively pursue them. How do
they know who is a soft touch and who is not? Easy: ey look for friend and
foe signals. If their targets make eye contact, the odds go up. If their targets
smile, the odds go up. If their targets show pity, the odds go up.
If you are constantly being targeted by beggars and panhandlers, it is most
likely because you are unwittingly sending them nonverbal signals that invite
personal contact. Without personal contact, the chances of receiving money
are nonexistent. Beggars know this and pursue targets who are more likely to
give them a return on their eﬀorts. So, in this case, an urban scowl could come
in quite handy.
Once, as a teenager, I was walking in a neighborhood I was unfamiliar with,
which turned out to be quite dangerous. I was very much a ﬁsh out of water.
An older man who recognized that I was out of my comfort zone came to my
rescue. He oﬀered me some unsolicited but extremely helpful advice in order
to get me safely out of the neighborhood: “Walk like you have somewhere to
go. Swing your arms and take purposeful steps. And if anyone talks to you, talk
like you’ve got something to say. If you can do that, you won’t be seen as a
potential victim  and [will] be less likely to be victimized.” It was good advice
then, and it is good advice now.
Your nonverbal (how you behave) and verbal (what you say)
communications send signals to those around you. Moving with purpose has a
purpose. To a potential predator, you are less likely to be seen as prey, just as a
healthy, speedy, alert antelope is not likely to be the target of ﬁrst choice for a
lion who is chasing a herd of the beasts across the African savanna.
Cullen Hightower has been credited with this very insightful observation:
“Strangers are what friends are made of.” Every time you encounter another
person for the ﬁrst time, that individual starts out as a stranger and, at the
moment of contact, occupies the exact middle position on the friend-foe
continuum. If you use the nonverbal and verbal signals discussed in this book,
you can turn strangers into friends.
THE HUMAN BASELINE
Picture yourself driving home from work when all of a sudden you notice that
another car is right on your tail. Your brain, which is constantly taking in
information from your ﬁve senses and scanning the data for possible danger,
has detected a threat. Another automobile has done something abnormal. It
has intruded into the bubble of space that separates “safe distance” from
“unsafe distance” and it now poses a risk to your well-being. Here is what’s
interesting: You have been “automatically” monitoring the traﬃc behind you,
not even aware you are doing it so long as other vehicles do not penetrate your
bubble of protection. It is only when a trailing vehicle violates the boundaries
of normal following distance that you take notice.
What is true with your driving is also true with making friends. Your brain
is automatically monitoring verbal and nonverbal communication. When the
inputs are assessed as normal and nonthreatening, you respond to them
automatically; they don’t arouse suspicion or a sense of danger. is is the
reason the techniques you’ll learn in this book work; they all fall within the
human baseline. Even though you might think a person would “pick up” on
what you are doing, they won’t because the brain perceives these behaviors as
normal and, like the cars following at a safe distance, they don’t arouse
attention.
roughout this book, we will emphasize friend and foe signals. ey all
fall within the human baseline and can be used to enhance your relationships.
Each of you has the capacity to use these signals; in fact, we all have used them
during our lives. Unfortunately, many people don’t know all of the signals
available to use, and/or how to use them most eﬀectively. is is even truer
today than in the past, due to technological advances that have stiﬂed the
development of our “emotional intelligence.”
MAKING FRIENDS IN A THUMB-TALKING WORLD
I once invited two students to the front of the room at the beginning of a
lecture and had them sit face-to-face in chairs. I asked them to talk to each
other for ﬁve minutes. ey looked puzzled and asked what they should talk
about. I told them to talk about anything they wanted to. ey couldn’t come
up with a single subject! ey just sat there and stared at each other. I then
instructed them to turn their chairs back to back, and text each other about
anything. Amazingly, they had no problem conversing with each other via text
for the ﬁve minutes.
And therein lies a problem. In the days before cell phones and video games,
kids would learn basic social skills during face-to-face interactions on the
playground. ey learned all about making friends and how to deal with
conﬂict and interpersonal diﬀerences; that’s where social skills were picked up.
Along the way, kids learned how to read and transmit subtle nonverbal signals,
even if they were not consciously aware of it.
In today’s “thumb-talking” world, nobody plays ball like generations of pre–
cell phone children used to. Kids stay home and play video games and text one
another. Sure, there are some organized sports and school activities, but face-
to-face social interaction has been drastically reduced in our tech-savvy world.
at’s bad. It’s not that “tech-raised” kids lack the capacity to pick up on social
skills and signals; it’s that they don’t have enough practice to hone these skills
and become eﬀective in handling face-to-face relations.

A visual demonstration that face-to-face communication is more difﬁcult than texting.
In the photo on the top of page 21, note the signals of disinterest between
the two individuals who are trying to carry on a conversation. e man has his
hands in his pockets and is looking away. e woman is looking down. ere
are no head tilts, no smiles, no positive gestures, no mirroring of each other.
e photo on the bottom shows the ease and positive body language associated
with young people in the midst of texting.
e Like Switch is designed to bring out the best in you when it comes to
making friends and enjoying successful relationships—in real life, not just in
digitally enhanced life.
2
GETTING NOTICED BEFORE A WORD IS
SPOKEN
You never get a second chance to make a good ﬁrst impression.
—WILL ROGERS
Perhaps you were fortunate enough as a child to spend a lazy summer evening
watching nature’s light show. Maybe you even grabbed a Mason jar from the
kitchen and tried to capture the pinpoints of luminescence that appeared and
disappeared in the gathering darkness, moving like tiny lanterns adrift on a
gentle breeze.
Fireﬂies are one of earth’s most fascinating creatures. For our purposes, how
ﬁreﬂies light up isn’t really that relevant; you’d need to be half biologist and
half physicist to understand the process. What is interesting is why they light
up.
It turns out ﬁreﬂies light up for a number of reasons. Some scientists believe
their ﬂashing is a warning to potential predators that they taste bitter and
would make a lousy meal. How the predators would leap to that conclusion
(leap is a good word, since frogs seem to devour them in serious numbers) is
not explained. Others point to the fact that diﬀerent species of ﬁreﬂies have
diﬀerent ﬂash patterns that help them identify members of their own species
and also determine the sex of the ﬂasher. e reason that is of interest here
involves the ﬁreﬂy’s use of light as a mating signal. Here “ﬂashing” takes on a
whole new meaning. It has been determined that male ﬁreﬂies have speciﬁc
ﬂash patterns that are used to attract their female counterparts. In case you
need a conversation starter, it might interest you that Marc Brown observed
that “higher male ﬂash rates, as well as increased ﬂash intensity, have been
shown to be more attractive to females in two diﬀerent ﬁreﬂy species.”
FIREFLIES AND FRIENDS
e behavior of the ﬁreﬂy is a great metaphor for how to be more attractive to
other people and predispose them to see us as potential friends. Because people
often see you before they hear you, the nonverbal signals you send them can
inﬂuence their opinion. is is particularly true when you are meeting a
person for the ﬁrst time and that individual has no prior knowledge of you.
Like the ﬁreﬂy, you can transmit “friend” or “foe” signals to individuals around
you in an attempt to encourage or discourage interaction. Or you can “turn
your light oﬀ” and remain relatively anonymous.
Remember that in any setting where two or more strangers are in line-of-
sight proximity to each other, there is the chance that one person will observe
the other. What he or she sees will be automatically processed by the observer’s
brain for potential “friend” or “foe” signals. In most cases, that’s as far as it goes
because the person’s visual appearance is “neutral,” and the brain, assessing the
person as neither a threat nor an opportunity, chooses to dismiss it entirely.
ink of it like a person trying to hail a cab in New York City. As dozens of
cabs move along the street the individual’s attention is on the dome light atop
the taxi. If the light is oﬀ, it is quickly ignored, but if the light is on, the
person’s attention and actions are directed to that speciﬁc vehicle.
I am sure that at some point you have been a part of a group of guys or a
group of girls who have gone to a nightclub, bar, or some other public
gathering place to try to meet members of the opposite sex. Ever notice how
some people seem to attract attention while others are hardly noticed?
Sometimes it is because of diﬀerences in physical attractiveness or outward
manifestations of wealth, but, just as often, if not more often, it is because the
“popular” person is sending out “friend” signals that gets them moved from the
“neutral” (stranger) point on the friend-foe continuum toward the positive
(friend) point on the continuum, increasing the chances of social interaction.
Remember, our brains are continually scanning the environment for friend
or foe signals. People who give oﬀ foe signals are perceived as a threat to be
avoided. People who transmit friend signals are viewed as nonthreatening and
approachable. When you meet people, especially for the ﬁrst time, ensure that
you send the right nonverbal cues that allow others to see you in a positive
rather than neutral or negative light.
THE “BIG THREE” FRIEND SIGNALS
What exactly are these nonverbal friend signals you can use to enhance your
chances of other people taking positive notice of you and laying a positive
groundwork for a friendship, whether for a night or a lifetime? ere are
numerous signals to choose from, but, for our purposes, three critical cues are
essential to use if you want to encourage others to see you as a likable person
and worthy of possible friendship. ey are the “eyebrow ﬂash,” “head tilt,”
and the real, as opposed to fake, “smile” (yes, the human brain can detect the
diﬀerence!).
THE EYEBROW FLASH
e eyebrow ﬂash is a quick up-and-down movement of the eyebrows that
lasts for about one-sixth of a second and is used as a primary, nonverbal friend
signal. As individuals approach one another they eyebrow-ﬂash each other to
send the message they don’t pose a threat. Within ﬁve to six feet of meeting
someone, our brains look for this signal. If the signal is present and we
reciprocate, our nonverbal communication is telling the other person we are
not a foe to be feared or avoided. Most people do not realize that they eyebrow
ﬂash because the gesture is almost an unconscious one. Experiment for
yourself: watch individuals as they meet each other for the ﬁrst time and, if
possible, in subsequent interactions. When people greet people for the ﬁrst
time in an oﬃce or social setting, they use a verbal greeting along with the
eyebrow ﬂash. Verbal greetings could include “How are you?” “What’s up?” or
“How’s it going?” e second time people see each other, they don’t have to say
anything, but they do exchange eyebrow ﬂashes, or in the case of males, display
chin juts. A chin jut is a forward and slightly upward movement of the chin.
e next time you meet someone, pay close attention to what you do and to
what the other person does. You will be amazed at the ﬂurry of nonverbal
activity  that takes place when people meet. You will be even more amazed that
you went through your entire life and never recognized the nonverbal cues you
have displayed.
Eyebrow ﬂashes can be sent over long distances. If you are interested in
meeting someone who is across a crowded room, send an eyebrow ﬂash and
watch for a return signal. If a reciprocating eyebrow ﬂash is sent, further
involvement is possible. No return signal could indicate a lack of interest.
erefore, you can use eyebrow ﬂashes as a kind of early warning system to
help you determine if the person you are interested in is interested in you. e
lack of a return eyebrow ﬂash might save you from an awkward moment, or
outright rejection, and indicate that your best course of action is to look
elsewhere for a more receptive individual to approach.


A natural eyebrow ﬂash. In real-life situations, it doesn’t appear so exaggerated because it occurs very
quickly . . . thus the term eyebrow ﬂash.
If you are still interested in meeting someone who doesn’t reciprocate your
eyebrow ﬂash, it doesn’t guarantee that person is “oﬀ-limits” but you might
want to use (and look for) other friend signals before you decide to actually try
to meet that individual.
“Friendly” eyebrow ﬂashes involve brief eye contact with other persons,
particularly if you don’t know the person or are a passing acquaintance.
Prolonged eye contact between two people indicates intense emotion, and is
either an act of love or hostility. Prolonged eye contact (“staring”) is so
disturbing that in normal social encounters we avoid eye contact lasting more
than a second or two. Among a crowd of strangers in a public setting, eye
contact will generally last only a fraction of a second, and most people will
avoid making any eye contact at all.
Not all eyebrow ﬂashes are friend signals. An example of an “unnatural”
eyebrow ﬂash is pictured on the next page. In real time, an unnatural eyebrow
ﬂash occurs when a person displays an eyebrow ﬂash with extended “hang
time” of the upward movement of the eyebrows. An unnatural eyebrow ﬂash
will be perceived as unfriendly at best and creepy at worst. If you see or display
an unnatural eyebrow ﬂash, it will be perceived as a foe signal and, like the
urban scowl, will not be conducive to social interaction or making friends.
THE HEAD TILT
A head tilt to the right or to the left is a nonthreatening gesture. e tilted
head exposes one of the carotid arteries, which are positioned on either side of
the neck. e carotid arteries are the pathways that supply the brain with
oxygenated blood. Severing either carotid artery causes death within minutes.
People who feel threatened protect their carotid arteries by tucking their neck
into their shoulders. People expose their carotid arteries when they meet people
who do not pose a threat.


Unnatural Eyebrow Flash
A head tilt is a strong friend signal. People who tilt their heads when they
interact with others are seen as more trustworthy and more attractive. Women
see men who approach them with their head slightly canted to one side or the
other as more handsome. Likewise, men see women who tilt their heads as
more attractive. Furthermore, people who tilt their heads toward the person
they are talking with are seen as more friendly, kind, and honest as compared
with individuals whose heads remain upright when they talk.
Head tilts
Women tilt their heads more often than men do. Men tend to
communicate with their heads upright to present themselves as more
dominant. is gesture in the business world may be an advantage; however, in
a social context, the absence of head tilting could send the wrong message. In
dating environments, such as nightclubs and bars, men should make a
conscious eﬀort to cant their heads to one side or the other when approaching
women or else they may be perceived as predators. In such cases, you might be
a “heads up” guy and your intensions may be friendly, but your actions will
cause women to go “on the defensive” and make meaningful contact diﬃcult,
if not impossible, to achieve.
It seems that the head tilt has universal “friend” appeal throughout the animal kingdom.
THE SMILE
A smile is a powerful “friend” signal. Smiling faces are judged to be more
attractive, more likable, and less dominant. A smile portrays conﬁdence,
happiness, and enthusiasm and, most important, signals acceptance. A smile
telegraphs friendliness and increases the attractiveness of the person who is
smiling. e mere act of smiling will put people in a better, more receptive
mood. For the most part, people smile at individuals they like and do not
smile at those they do not like.
A smile releases endorphins, which give us a sense of well-being. When we
smile at other people, it is very diﬃcult for them not to smile back. is return
smile causes the target of your smile to feel good about themselves, and, as we
will learn in a later chapter, if you make people feel good about themselves,
they will like you.
e only problem with the smile is what scientists and observant members
of the general population have long recognized: ere is the “real” or “genuine”
smile and then there is the “fake” or “forced” smile. e “real” smile is used
around people we really want to make contact with or already know and like.
e fake smile, on the other hand, is often used when we are forced by social
obligation or the requirements of our job to appear friendly toward another
individual or group.

Can you tell which smile is the “real” smile and which one is “fake”? If you can’t, don’t de-spair. Actually, they’re
both real smiles!
If you want people to like you, your smiles should be genuine. e telltale
signs of a genuine smile are the upturned corners of the mouth and upward
movement of the cheeks accompanied by wrinkling around the edges of the
eyes. As opposed to sincere smiles, forced smiles tend to be lopsided. For right-
handed people a forced smile tends to be stronger on the right side of the face,
and for left-handed people, it tends to be stronger on the left. Fake smiles also
lack synchrony. ey begin later than real smiles and taper oﬀ in an irregular
manner. With a real smile, the cheeks are raised, bagged skin forms under the
eyes, crow’s feet appear around the corners of the eyes, and with some
individuals, the nose may dip downward. In a fake smile, you can see that the
corners of the mouth are not upturned and the cheeks are not uplifted to cause
wrinkling around the eyes, the telltale sign of a genuine smile. Wrinkling
around the eyes is often diﬃcult to see in young people, whose skin is more
elastic than older folks. Nonetheless, our brains can spot the diﬀerence
between a real smile and a fake smile.

The smile on the top is fake, the expression on the top right is neutral, and the smile on the bottom is real.
SMILES FOR EFFECT
e way you smile will inﬂuence the way people perceive you and encourage
or discourage friendship formation. Women in particular often use smiles to
regulate the initiation of ﬁrst encounters and to set the pace of the subsequent
personal interactions. Men more readily approach women who smile at them.
A sincere smile gives men permission to approach. A forced smile or no smile
at all sends the message that a woman is not interested in a man’s overtures.
Likewise, a woman can send the message that she is open to male approaches
by regulating the frequency and intensity of her smile, in conjunction with
other friend signals.
Learning how to produce a “real” smile at will, particularly when you don’t
feel in the mood to display it, takes practice. Study the pictures in the book
and think about smiles you have seen in your everyday life. en stand in front
of a mirror and actually produce fake and real smiles. It won’t be that diﬃcult.
Just think about the times you have genuinely wanted to show appreciation to
someone you loved or were forced to smile at some unwanted houseguest at a
family dinner or at an obnoxious business associate. Practice the real smile
until it becomes automatic.  en you can choose to use it when you wish.
EYE CONTACT
Eye contact works in concert with other friend signals. Eye contact can be
attempted from a distance and, therefore, like other nonverbal signals in this
chapter, it is a way to get noticed before a word is spoken. Also, like the other
nonverbal signals, it is designed to give the signal receiver a positive impression
of you, as someone who will be perceived as a potential friend.
To send a friend signal via eye contact, pick out your person of interest and
establish eye contact by holding your gaze for no longer than a second.
Holding an eye gaze for longer than that can be perceived as aggression, which
is a foe signal. As mentioned earlier, when you stare at someone, especially in a
dating environment, you are invading his or her personal space. If you do not
have permission to enter that individual’s personal space, your actions will be
perceived as predatory behavior at best, creepy at worst. You should end the
eye gaze with a smile. If you cannot manage a genuine smile, make sure that
the corners of your mouth are upturned and wrinkle the outer edges of your
eyes. A return smile indicates interest. If your person of interest meets your
gaze, looks down and away brieﬂy, and then reestablishes eye contact, you can
approach this person with a high degree of conﬁdence that your overtures will
be well received.
EXTENDED EYE GAZE
Extended eye gaze is a powerful rapport builder. is nonverbal behavior
should not be confused with staring. Typically, when you make contact with
another person, your eyes lock for a second or less and then you break eye
contact. Eye contact lasting more than a second or two will be perceived as
threatening. Staring at people, especially strangers, is considered a foe signal.
However, when two people know and like each other, they are permitted to
make eye contact for longer than a few seconds. People who are romantically
involved often stare into each other’s eyes for extended periods of time. With
the following technique the power of this mutual gaze can be safely used on
strangers to enhance rapport building.
After you make eye contact with your person of interest, hold your gaze for
one second and then slowly turn your head, holding your gaze for another
second or two. e person you are looking at will see your head turning away,
giving the illusion of broken eye contact, and your actions will not be
perceived as staring. is technique allows you to intensify the emotional
content of your friend signal. Increased eye contact should not be used to force
premature intimacy. Men often overuse this technique and sabotage potential
relationships.
PUPIL DILATION
Pupil dilation expresses interest. When an individual sees another person they
like, their pupils, the black portion of their eyes, expand. e wider the
dilation, the more the attraction the person feels. is is obviously a cue for
positive attraction, although it is diﬃcult to spot in everyday personal
interactions. us its value as a friend signal is very limited.
Pupil dilation is most noticeable in people with blue eyes. People who have
dark eyes appear more exotic because their eyes appear to be dilated all the
time. In the last century BC, Cleopatra, the most beautiful woman of her time,
used atropine, a naturally occurring drug, to dilate her pupils to make herself
appear more sensual. Pupil dilation can occur with changes in ambient light,
so care should be taken when interpreting this autonomic response.
GETTING CONSENT TO GO TO PRISON: USING FRIEND SIGNALS TO
ENCOURAGE A CONFESSION
In one particular case, while I was at the FBI, we had identiﬁed a suspected
child molester. We knew of one victim, but signs pointed to many more. It was
believed that the suspect used his computer to target victims. I wanted to arrest
him immediately but lacked the necessary probable cause to obtain the arrest
warrant.
I decided to interview the suspect to seek his consent for the FBI to
examine his personal computer. If the interview had any chance of success, I
had to create a nonthreatening environment, quickly build rapport, and, when
the time was right, ask for consent. I invited the suspect to meet me at the FBI
oﬃce. I did this to give him a sense of control (he could determine his course
of action) and to demonstrate that the interview was voluntary (he wasn’t
being forced to participate in the interview).
I met the suspect at the door with a manufactured eyebrow ﬂash, a slightly
tilted head, and a simulated real smile complete with crow’s feet around my
eyes. Displaying real friend signals was not possible because I found the
suspect’s behavior reprehensible. I warmly shook his hand and invited him into
the interview room. I oﬀered him a cup of coﬀee, for two reasons. First, I
wanted to tap into the psychological principle of reciprocity. When people
receive things, even trivial things, they feel a need to reciprocate. In exchange
for coﬀee I wanted consent. Second, I wanted to use the suspect’s placement of
the cup to determine when rapport had been established (cup placement will
be discussed in a later chapter). When I handed the suspect the cup of coﬀee,
he stated, “How could you treat me with such respect after what I did?” is
was an admission, albeit a small one, even before the interview began. I was
able to establish suﬃcient rapport with the suspect using mimicked friend
signals to give the suspect the illusion that I was not a threat, but a person he
could trust with a secret. A secret that put him in jail for the rest of his life.
THE BOTOX PARADOX
When it comes to friend signals, sometimes the best of intentions have
unforeseen negative consequences. Consider, for example, the sad story of the
aging wife who wanted to look younger and more attractive for her spouse. She
decided to get Botox treatments for her face, a bit of sculpting to get the lines
and wrinkles out. She couldn’t wait to show oﬀ the results to her husband.
So, what happened when he saw his “new” wife? Because the Botox
paralyzes certain muscles around the eyes for about two months, she couldn’t
display eyebrow ﬂashes and full, real smiles, including the crow’s feet he was
used to seeing. e woman looked more attractive but because her husband
wasn’t getting the friend signals he was accustomed to, he suspected his wife
didn’t love him anymore and that she had gotten the procedure to look more
appealing for someone else. Unless the husband is aware of why the wife is not
sending the friend signals he has come to expect, the results of trying to be
pretty could turn out quite ugly!

All examples of safe touching. At the beginning of a relationship, touching should be limited to touching between
the elbow and shoulder and hand to hand.
TOUCH: A FRIENDSHIP SIGNAL . . . BUT PROCE ED WITH CAUTION
Touching is a powerful, subtle, and complex form of nonverbal
communication. In social situations, the language of touch can be used to
convey a surprising variety of messages. Diﬀerent touches can be used to
express agreement, aﬀection, aﬃliation, or attraction, to oﬀer support,
emphasize a point, call for attention or participation, guide and direct, greet,
congratulate, establish or reinforce power relations, and negotiate levels of
intimacy.
For our purposes, touch is important in making friends, as studies have
concluded that even the most ﬂeeting touch can have a dramatic inﬂuence on
our perceptions and relationships. Experiments have shown that even a light,
brief touch on the arm during a brief social encounter between strangers has
both immediate and lasting positive eﬀects. Polite requests for help or
directions, for example, produce more positive results when accompanied by a
light touch on the arm.
But proceed cautiously: Even the most innocuous of touches can produce a
negative reaction in the person being touched. ese negative reactions include
pulling the arm away, increasing distance, frowning, turning away, or other
expressions of displeasure or anxiety. Negative reactions indicate that the
person will be unlikely to see you as a potential friend.
Unless the individual is exceptionally shy and reserved, negative reactions to
a simple arm touch probably indicate dislike or distrust. With the exception of
a traditional handshake, touching another person’s hand is more personal than
touching his or her arm. Hand touching serves as a barometer for romantic
relationships. Movies often focus on hand touching to signal that a
relationship is cold, growing, or in full bloom. If you touch a person’s hand
and they pull away, even slightly, the person being touched is not yet ready to
intensify the relationship. Pulling away does not necessarily signal rejection. It
means that you will have to build more rapport with your person of interest
before advancing the relationship. Touch acceptance signals that the person is
ready for hand holding, a more intense form of touching. Interlocking of the
ﬁngers during hand holding is the most intimate form of hand holding. A risk-
free way to measure the strength of a new relationship is to “accidentally”
touch or brush against the hand of your person of interest. Most people will
tolerate an accidental touch, even if they don’t like the person touching them,
but they will unconsciously send nonverbal signals indicating the acceptance or
rejection of the touch. Watch for these nonverbal displays and proceed
accordingly.
ISOPRAXISM (MIRRORING THE BEHAVIOR OF ANOTHER PERSON)
Isopraxism is the fancy term for “mirroring,” a nonverbal practice that can be
used to make friendship development easier and more eﬀective. Mirroring
creates a favorable impression in the mind of the person you are mirroring.
When you ﬁrst meet someone and want to gain their friendship, make a
conscious eﬀort to mirror their body language. If they stand with their arms
crossed, you stand with your arms crossed. If they sit with their legs crossed,
you sit with your legs crossed. In some situations, mirroring is impractical. A
woman who is wearing a short dress or skirt cannot be expected to assume an
open leg cross to mirror the person she is talking with. In this instance, cross
matching will suﬃce. Instead of an open leg cross, a woman could assume a
closed leg cross at the ankles or knees.
e other person will not consciously notice your mirroring behavior
because it falls within the human baseline and the brain considers it “normal.”
However, the absence of mirroring is a foe signal and the brain will take notice
when two people are out of synchrony during personal interactions. e
person not being mirrored may not be able to speciﬁcally articulate why they
are uncomfortable, but this foe signal will trigger a defensive response, which
discourages attempts at friendship.
Isopraxism (mirroring) gestures
Mirroring takes practice. Fortunately, you can rehearse mirroring in any
professional or social setting. When you casually talk to a group of friends at
work or in a social setting, you will notice that the members of the group will
mirror one another. To practice th e mirroring technique, change your stance or
posture. Within a short period of time, other members of the group will
mirror your posture. e ﬁrst few times you do this, you may feel as though
everybody in the group knows what you are doing. I can assure you they will
not know. What you are experiencing is the spotlight eﬀect described later in
this chapter. Another way to practice isopraxism is to mirror random people
when you meet them. After a few sessions, you will master the mirroring
technique and will be able to use it as an additional tool in establishing
friendships.
THE INWARD LEAN
People tend to lean toward individuals they like and distance themselves from
people they don’t like. Occasionally during my FBI career, I was asked to
attend embassy parties and diplomatic functions. I spent most of my time
observing the other guests to determine which relationships were well
established, which relationships were developing, and which guests were
receptive to relationship building.
An inward lean is receptive to relationship building. Inward leaning between people conversing indicates a positive
relationship has already been established. Inward leaning in association with other friend signals such as smiles,
head nodding, head tilts, whispering, and touching indicates an even closer relationship between the parties
involved.
People tilt their heads slightly backward to increase distance from another
person, which signals that relationship building is not going well. e same
thing applies when individuals turn their torsos away from another person
during interaction. People will also reposition their feet away from unwanted
visitors. ese subtle, nonverbal cues can mean the diﬀerence between
acceptance and rejection.
I often use nonverbal signals to monitor the eﬀectiveness of my lectures.
Students who are interested in the material will lean forward in their seats, tilt
their heads to the right or the left, and periodically nod their heads in
agreement. Students who are not interested, or who have lost interest, will lean
back in their seats, roll their eyes, or in extreme circumstances, tilt their heads
backward or forward as they doze oﬀ.
is focus on nonverbal cues can also be used in business settings. If you are
making a sales pitch to a group of people, you can learn who you have won
over, who is on the fence, or who is in opposition by monitoring the nonverbal
gestures displayed by your audience.
THE TABLES ARE TURNED . . . OR TURN THOSE WHO ARE AT THE TABLE
Back in my days at the FBI, I had to do many presentations. In one particular
presentation I was trying to obtain the necessary funds for an operation that I
had been planning for months. e operation was complex and somewhat
expensive. Getting funding came down to convincing the people at the
meeting that the beneﬁt from the operation was worth the amount of resources
expended.
As I made my presentation, I monitored the nonverbal displays of the
people who were sitting around the table. I immediately identiﬁed the ones
who were on my side. ey were leaning forward and occasionally nodding
their heads. I also identiﬁed those who were skeptical about the merits of the
operation or the expenditure of resources. My immediate inclination was to
talk to the people who agreed with me (preaching to the choir) because I
would ﬁnd acceptance and comfort from those people who thought the same
way I did. I resisted this temptation. I didn’t have to convince the people who I
had already won over. I had to win over those people who did not agree with
me.
I focused my attention on them. On several occasions, I walked around the
room moving closer to my detractors, looked directly at them, and made
personal appeals. Ever so slowly, I could see that the tide was turning. ose
individuals originally aligned against me began leaning forward by increments
and their heads tilted more and more to either side.
After my presentation, I received approval for my operation. Monitoring
nonverbal cues and knowing what they meant gave me an enormous advantage
in presenting my case. I was able to tailor my presentation to the people who
disagreed with me and win them over.
WHISPERING
Whispering is an intimate behavior and positive friend signal. Not every one
can whisper in your ear with impunity. When you see whispering taking place
between two individuals, you can be relatively certain a close personal
relationship exists.
FOOD FORKING
Imagine sitting in a restaurant and some stranger comes over to your table and
picks food oﬀ your plate with a fork! You would certainly feel uneasy, and be
most unlikely to ask the individual to join you for dinner. Now imagine you
are having a pleasant meal with your family and a son or sister reaches over and
picks a piece of food oﬀ your plate with a fork. e probability is your reaction
would be radically diﬀerent from when the stranger did the same thing. e
diﬀerence is that you have a close relationship with your family members and,
under these conditions, food forking is considered appropriate. Food forking,
then, is a friend signal and, if permitted, indicates a close relationship between
the person possessing the food and the person reaching for it.
EXPRESSIVE GESTURES
e amount and intensity of gestures people use vary from one culture to
another and even within cultures. Some people are naturally more expressive
than others, even in more socially restrained cultures. Nonetheless, people who
like one another tend to display more expressive gestures. Expressive gestures
signal interest in what the other person is saying and keeps the focus of the
conversation on the speaker.
Speakers can emphasize a point with a sharp downward movement of the
hand at the end of a sentence, or express openness and sincerity with extended
open palms. Expressive gestures reinforce verbal communication and mutual
interest.
You can encourage potential friends to continue speaking (and like you
more because of it) by additional head nodding, smiles, and focused attention
(when you lean forward, cock your head slightly and appear to be listening
intensely to what is being said). Be aware that nonverbal gestures can also
signal discomfort, dislike, or disinterest.
HEAD NODDING
One way we signal to a speaker that we are engaged with them and that they
should continue is with a head nod. It tells the speaker to keep talking. A
double nod tells the speaker to increase the tempo of the speech. Multiple head
nods or a single slow nod tend to cause a disruption in the speakers cadence.
Excessive head nodding can rush a response. Rapid head nodding sends a
nonverbal cue for the speaker to hurry his or her response, usually because the
listener wants to say something or is disinterested. Inappropriate rapid head
nodding can be perceived as rude behavior or an attempt to dominate the
conversation. is behavior takes the focus oﬀ the speaker and turns the
spotlight onto the listener, which is a clear violation of the Golden Rule of
Friendship, and will be discussed in the next chapter. Used correctly, head
nodding allows the speaker to fully express his or her thoughts in a satisfying
manner. If you use appropriate head nods, you will be perceived as a good
listener, and viewed in a positive light.
VERBAL NUDGES
Verbal nudges reinforce head nodding and encourage the speaker to continue
talking. Verbal nudges consist of speech conﬁrmation indicators such as “I see”
and “Go on” plus word ﬁllers such as “Ummm” and “Uh-huh.” Verbal nudges
let the speaker know that you are not only listening but are also validating the
speaker’s message with verbal conﬁrmation.
FOCUSED ATTENTION
Don’t let distractions interrupt your attentive listening to the speaker. You
want to send the message that what the speaker is saying is important to you.
at message will ring hollow if you answer your cell phone and put the
speaker on hold. If your cell phone rings while you are in a conversation, ﬁght
the urge to answer. For reasons unknown, most people feel compelled to
answer a ringing phone. Just because your cell is ringing doesn’t mean you are
obligated to answer it. Rarely are telephone calls urgent. If no message is left,
that is clearly the case. And if a message is left, you can listen to it, usually in a
matter of minutes, once your conversation has ﬁnished. Even in today’s tech-
savvy world, texting and answering telephone calls during a conversation is
disrespectful.
e best way to handle a ringing phone is to take it out of your pocket or
purse, send the caller to voice mail, put it back into your pocket or purse, and
return your attention to the speaker. is action sends a deliberate message to
the speaker that he or she is more important than a telephone call and they
have your undivided attention. Plus, you will make a positive impression on
them . . . m aking any relationship easier to achieve.
SEVEN TIPS TO GET HIGHER TIPS
Getting people to like you, even for a onetime encounter, can be beneﬁcial. You are more likely to have
complaints addressed properly, you are more likely to get people to assist you, even when they don’t have to go
the extra mile, and—if you’re a waiter or waitress—you can predispose people to show their appreciation for
personal service in the form of higher tips.
The key to receiving higher tips is to create an environment that pre disposes customers to like the server.
Tip 1: Lightly Touch Customers (Female Servers)
Research shows that female servers who touch customers, male or female, lightly on the shoulder, hand, or arm
receive higher tips than from customers who are not touched. Males, in particular, drank more alcohol than
customers who were not touched, creating more opportunities to tip the server. Touch when interpreted properly
produces a feeling of friendliness and, therefore, pre disposes customers to tip more generously.
A word of warning: Touching can have a negative effect if it is perceived as ﬂirtatious or dominating and
could reduce the amount of tips rather than increase them. Female servers should be careful when touching
male customers who are in the company of involved females because any touching could produce jealousy.
Tip 2: Wear Something in Your Hair (Female Servers)
Female servers who wear ornamentation in their hair such as ﬂowers, real or fake, barrettes, or other similar
objects receive higher tips from both male and female customers. One explanation for this ﬁnding is that
customers may perceive servers who wear ornaments in their hair as more attractive, which thus predisposes
customers to give higher tips. Interestingly, attractiveness has no effect on tip amounts for male servers from
either male or female customers.
Now, let’s tackle the eight-hundred-pound gorilla in the room. Yes, research shows that more attractive
female servers get higher tips than less attractive servers do, regardless of the level of service. Servers with
larger breasts get higher tips. Servers with blond hair get higher tips. Tips increase as a server’s body size
decreases. Servers who wear makeup receive higher tips from male customers but not from female customers.
That is just the way it is. Enough said.
Tip 3: Introduce Yourself by Name (Male and Female Servers)
When servers introduce themselves by name, they receive higher tips. Personal introductions make the servers
appear friendlier. Customers tip servers who appear friendly and likable. Servers who introduced themselves by
name received an average tip of two dollars more than servers who did not. Mundanely providing customers
your name is not sufﬁcient. Your introduction should be accompanied by a wide smile as it makes you appear
friendlier and more personable and thus predisposes customers to leave higher tips.
Tip 4: Create Reciprocity (Male and Female Servers)
When people receive something from somebody, they are predisposed to reciprocate. Customers who receive
something, even small items, will typically reciprocate by leaving a larger tip. Servers can induce reciprocity
through several techniques; even just writing “Thank you” on the back of the check will produce higher tips.
Reciprocity can also be induced in a more subtle fashion. Just prior to the time when the customers’ orders
are complete, tell one of the customers that the manner in which the food was prepared was not up to your
standards and that you sent the meal back to the chef to have it cooked correctly. Then apologize for the delay
and, after a few minutes, serve the food as it was originally prepared. The customers perceive that you have
done them a favor, although no favor was actually performed, thus predisposing the customers to reciprocate
by means of a higher gratuity. Caution should be used when using this technique. You should select
imperfections that do not question the taste or quality of the food or discredit the restaurant. Reciprocity can
also be induced by bringing mints along with the check.
Tip 5: Repeat the Customer’s Order (Male and Female Servers)
People like people who are like them. When you repeat orders, customers subconsciously feel that you are more
like them than not. People who are in good rapport mirror each other’s gestures and speech. By repeating the
customers’ orders, they experience sameness with you, like you more, and tend to leave bigger tips.
Tip 6: Provide Good Service (Male and Female Servers)
At the heart of a good tip is good service. Greet customers with a warm, friendly smile, introduce yourself by
name, repeat the customers’ order, reﬁll drink glasses without being asked, and periodically check in on the
customers to see if they need anything. Each customer is different and you should learn to speed-read them.
Some customers want to be pampered, some customers require minimal service, and some customers just want
to be left alone to enjoy their meal. The quicker you learn to read your customers, the higher your tips will be.
Tip 7: Apply the Golden Rule of Friendship
The Golden Rule of Friendship (see Chapter 3) applies to everyone: “Make the customers feel good about
themselves and they will like you.” The more customers like their servers, the higher the tips they are likely to
leave.
FOE SIGNALS
As you’ll recall from the beginning of the chapter, ﬁreﬂies can light up as a
friend signal to attract members of the opposite sex or as a foe signal to stave
oﬀ would-be predators. e same is true with each of us. We have the capacity
to transmit friend or foe signals to those around us. Obviously, in a book about
making friends, one would hope that your focus would be on sending out
friend signals and avoiding nonverbal cues that encourage others to perceive
you as a foe. e problem is (as the student with the “urban scowl” discovered)
we are not always aware we are sending out foe signals, oftentimes because we
don’t realize what they are. When the goal is to make people you do not know
view you favorably, whether it be for a onetime interaction or a lasting
friendship, you want to use “ﬁreﬂy” tactics (nonverbal signals) to make your
intentions known and predispose the targeted individual to like you. us, foe
signals are nonverbal signals you don’t want to send or see when you attempt
interactions with strangers.
If you are having trouble making friends you might want to study your
gestures and facial expressions to see if you are the unwitting transmitter of any
or all of the following nonverbal behaviors.
THE ELONGATED GAZE (STARE)
Eye contact, in concert with other friend signals, can have a positive impact on
both parties involved as long as the gaze doesn’t last longer than a second. As
pointed out earlier, gazing that continues beyond a second is often perceived as
aggression, which turns the nonverbal communication into a foe signal. e
human brain perceives such behavior as predatory in nature and sends a
“shields up” warning to the person at the receiving end of the eye contact.
ELEVATOR EYES
Elevator eyes consist of a sweeping head-to-toe gaze. As a nonverbal gesture, it
is highly oﬀensive in ﬂedgling relationships. is form of eye gaze is perceived
as intrusive because the person doing the looking has not yet earned the right
to invade personal space, which can be violated psychologically as well as
physically. Invading personal space with your eyes can be perceived as being
oﬀensive, sometimes even more oﬀensive than the physical invasion of
personal space. In some cases, the behavior can also be viewed as threatening
and/or aggressive, causing a defensive response from the person being looked
at. In contrast, a head-to-toe gaze will be accepted or even be seen as
complimentary in a close, established relationship.
THE BOYFRIEND BODY SCAN
Long before the tolerated but unpleasant full body scans became a necessity at
airports around the world, they were being done by individuals using “elevator
eyes” to size up persons of interest. I routinely used the full body scan when
my daughter’s boyfriends would appear at the front door. I would open the
door, stare deeply into the suitor’s eyes, and very slowly scan his body from
head to toe. I would ﬁnish my introduction with a stern, “What do you want?”
e young man would stammer and stutter to ﬁnd words to say. I knew then
that my message was received loud and clear. at nonverbal message was
more eﬀective than any verbal threats I could have issued.
UNCOVERED
During my post-FBI career, I trained undercover police oﬃcers in how to
behave during operations to avoid being identiﬁed. Eye gaze is one of the
nonverbal cues that exposes undercover oﬃcers. As stated earlier, people have
to earn the right to enter your personal space physically or with their eyes.
Police oﬃcers, by virtue of their authority, have the right to look into places
and at people in a way normal people can’t. Have you ever been stopped in
traﬃc at a red light next to a police car? You take sneak peeks into the oﬃcer’s
car. If the oﬃcer happens to turn and meet your gaze, you quickly break eye
contact and look forward again. e opposite is not true. If the police oﬃcer
looks into your car and you meet his gaze, he does not break eye contact, he
just continues to look. You would likely be the one who quickly breaks eye
contact and hope he doesn’t ﬁnd a reason to stop you. e police oﬃcer has
the right to look at you and into your car by virtue of his authority; you can’t
do the same thing without risking social repercussions.
e freedom to look in forbidden spaces is one of the most common
nonverbal “tells” that expose undercover oﬃcers. For example, an undercover
oﬃcer is assigned to go to a bar where known drug dealers hang out, to make
friends with them and buy drugs. When the undercover oﬃcer walks into the
bar for the ﬁrst time, he will, out of habit, pause for a moment, make a slow
scan of the room looking for possible threats, walk to the bar, and order a
drink. e undercover oﬃcer feels comfortable invading other people’s space
with his eyes (making direct eye contact) because of his authority as a law
enforcement oﬃcer. e problem is that normal people don’t act this way
when they enter a bar for the ﬁrst time, especially a shady establishment.
When people enter a bar for the ﬁrst time, they typically walk directly to the
bar or a table and sit down without making direct eye contact with anyone.
Once they are seated and have a drink in hand, they then are permitted to take
furtive looks around the bar. Conversely, people who routinely frequent the bar
have earned the right to invade personal space and are permitted to look
around the bar for friends when they enter. is nonverbal tell, albeit subtle, is
easily picked up by criminals, who, for fear of getting caught, are very adept at
reading people.
An eye roll
EYE ROLLS
Rolling your eyes at someone is a “foe signal” that discourages further
interaction. It sends the message you think the individual is stupid or that his
or her actions are inappropriate. If, for instance, you are in a large group and
spot someone saying something you think is dumb, you might roll your eyes in
response. If the person who made the comment sees you doing this, it
predisposes them to respond negatively to you in any future interactions. is
holds true whether you are a stranger or are known to that individual.
WATCH FOR EYE ROLL
Watching for eye rolls at meetings can be an entertaining way to pass the time,
and can provide information about where people stand on speciﬁc issues.
When people disagree with a comment or proposal, they will often roll their
eyes when the person who made the comment or proposal turns away or looks
at his or her notes. is nonverbal signal identiﬁes who is not receptive to what
is being said.
If you make a comment and catch somebody rolling their eyes, focus your
attention on that person to try to convince them your idea has merit.
Remember: You don’t have to spend time trying to convince the choir, the
ones who are nodding their approval, leaning forward, and smiling.
SQUINTING OF THE EYES
is foe signal is not as powerful as other foe cues are, but can still have a
chilling eﬀect on personal relationships. If the squinting is due to factors such
as looking into bright illumination, it might be wrongly interpreted.
FURROWED EYEBROWS
is is another common foe signal, assuming it is not due to someone being in
deep concentration. is nonverbal cue is often associated with disapproval,
uncertainty, or anger.
Furrowed eyebrows
FACIAL TENSION
Tightened jaw muscles, narrowing of the eyes, and furrowed eyebrows are a
cluster of nonverbal foe signals that can be seen from a distance and serve as
early warning indicators to alert you to the possibility that the person you are
about to meet may pose a threat. Displaying foe signals makes meaningful
communication diﬃcult, especially in new relationships. Facial tension can be
easily misinterpreted because people often carry over tensions from their jobs
or home lives to social situations, causing new friends or even old ones to take
note and become unnecessarily guarded and apprehensive.
AGGRESSIVE STANCE
A wide stance with arms akimbo (hands on hips) is a foe signal. A wide stance
lowers the body’s center of gravity and is used by a person preparing for a ﬁght.
Arms akimbo widens a person’s proﬁle in an attempt to display dominance.
ATTACK SIGNALS
People who are about to attack telegraph nonverbal signals such as clenching
their ﬁsts and widening their stance for stability. A wide stance lowers the
body’s center of gravity in preparation for a ﬁght. A wide stance with arms
akimbo (hands on hips) signals dominance. Arms akimbo widens a person’s
proﬁle in an attempt to display dominance. Oftentimes, an angry person’s
nostrils “ﬂare” (widen) in an attempt to enhance oxygen intake. ey are also
likely to give anger signs such as redness of the face. Obviously, these foe
signals alert the scanning brain to potential danger and prepare the recipient of
these attack signals for the “ﬁght or ﬂight” response, hardly a prelude to a
positive friendship.
An Attack Stance
INSULTING GESTURES
Numerous gestures are oﬀensive to others and antithetical to developing good
relationships. Some of them are almost universally recognized: for example, the
upraised middle ﬁnger. It is doubtful anyone intent on establishing a positive
interaction with another person would transmit this gesture. e problem is
that certain gestures that are “harmless” (have no negative connotation) in one
culture might be highly oﬀensive in another. Just as the same words have
diﬀerent meanings across diﬀerent cultures, so, too, do nonverbal
communications. If you note that somebody reacts negatively toward you for
no “apparent” reason you might want to consider if any gesture you just made
might have been perceived as oﬀensive to them.
SCRUNCHED NOSE
Like other foe signals, a scrunched nose makes anyone observing it less likely
to see you in a positive light and less open to any further overtures you send
their way.
A Scrunched Nose
CLOTHING, ACCESSORIES, AND OTHER ITEMS WORN ON THE BODY
e old saying “one man’s ﬂoor is another man’s ceiling” is applicable to this
particular foe signal (or cluster of signals). For example, if you’re sporting a
leather jacket with a skull and crossbones, have numerous tattoos on your
arms, and are wearing a spike necklace, it might be interpreted by someone
who doesn’t know you as a person to avoid at all costs. In that sense, your
appearance is a foe signal. On the other hand, if you happen to be at a death
metal concert, the same outﬁt might be seen as a friend signal worthy of
notice. us you will need to determine, using common sense, whether the
way you are clothed and accessorized will likely be perceived as a friend or foe
signal by a person you might want to approach. Just because someone is
dressed diﬀerently than you doesn’t guarantee that your appearance will
automatically be a “turnoﬀ,” but the adage “birds of a feather ﬂock together”
should be considered when it comes to interactions between individuals with
signiﬁcantly diﬀerent ways of adorning their bodies.
My son, Bradley, inadvertently taught me a valuable lesson about assessing
people by the clothes they wear. In high school, he went through a phase where
he was all about men’s fashion, which included spending every penny he
earned at his part-time job after school on clothes and accessories. I
accompanied Bradley to the shopping mall one day to buy a wallet. He looked
at the most expensive wallets in an exclusive clothier shop. e one he bought
cost $150. I was shocked. I pulled out my three-fold wallet and reminded him
that my wallet only cost about $20 including tax. “No, Dad,” he replied. “It’s
the details that make the diﬀerence. You can wear expensive clothes and shoes
but people will know you are a ‘poser’ if you pull out a twenty-dollar, three-
fold wallet.” My son eventually passed through that phase in his life and is
back to wearing faded blue jeans and sweatshirts, but I still carry the lesson he
taught me.
From that day forward I paid closer attention to the details. I look at stitch
count in shirts. e more stitches per inch, the higher the quality of the shirt.
Four-millimeter buttons are sewn on higher-quality shirts. If a man wears an
expensive suit and a cheap watch, he is pretending to be someone he is not.
Unshined shoes are another sign of a poser. People who engage in perception
management often overlook the details, a tell that exposes who they really are.
WHO WAS THAT MASKED MAN?
Although it is usually worn by individuals who require it due to a medical condition, a face mask, particularly
the “surgical” kind that covers the mouth and nose of the user, acts as a foe signal even when that is not its
intended purpose.
A masked individual sends out such a powerful foe signal that one person I know used it to increase the
space around him on the notoriously crowded commuter trains that service the New York City area. His modus
operandi was to occupy the window seat where the aisle seat next to him was open. Then, when anyone
approached the unoccupied seat, he would turn his head so that his masked mouth and nose were clearly
visible. Many times the seat remained open until all other available seats in the car were taken.
And he didn’t stop there. If someone did sit next to him, he would begin to twitch and mutter under his
breath. This was usually sufﬁcient to dislodge the newly arrived seatmate. If that didn’t work, he would reach in
his pocket, pull out a pill bottle that obviously was issued from a drugstore, take out a pill, lift up his mask,
and pop the pill in his mouth. Very few people can sit through such an experience and remain in place.
It turns out that karma has its moments. On one particular trip, the masked individual glanced up at a man
moving toward him in the aisle, shifted in his seat to be sure the stranger saw the white surgical mask on his
face, and then turned back to the window. A moment later, he caught a glimpse of the stranger sitting down
next to him. So he went into his twitch-and-mutter scenario. The stranger remained rooted in his chair. Finally,
the masked passenger took out his trusty pill bottle and went through his pill-taking routine. The person next to
him remained, without unmoving.
The masked passenger couldn’t believe his ruse had failed. He turned his head to see what kind of person
could remain in such a threatening environment. What he saw was a seatmate who was now also wearing a
face mask, twitching, and holding a prescription bottle in his hand! That was all he needed to see. Without any
hesitation, he bolted from his window seat and moved down the aisle into the next passenger car.
TERRITORIAL (PERSONAL SPACE) INVASION
ere seem to be deﬁnite consistencies in the ways humans govern the space
around them, that is, the manner in which they regulate the distance between
themselves and other people. e term for such spatial regulation is
territoriality, and the territorial imperative is practiced by humans and lower
animals alike. e underlying principle of territoriality is that many species of
life desire and attempt to maintain a speciﬁed amount and quality of space for
themselves. If you don’t believe that the territorial imperative exists, get on a
bus or subway car occupied by only one other passenger and plop yourself
down next to him. In some instances, people will tolerate an invasion of their
personal space if the invasion occurs in a side-by-side encounter such as in
crowded elevators or at sporting events.
“Invading” another person’s territory—whether through intrusive eye
contact or actual physical closeness—is a powerful foe signal.
e purpose of using friend signals when ﬁrst meeting a stranger is to
encourage them to allow you into their territory without them feeling
threatened or under siege. If a person you wish to meet judges you as friendly,
then he or she will be more willing to allow you to enter their personal space.
Territorial boundaries are, of course, invisible and can vary from person to
person and from culture to culture. For example, a person who has been
physically abused will typically have a larger personal space to protect himself
or herself from anyone who poses a physical threat. Similarly, an individual
who has been emotionally hurt may be very cautious about who they allow
into their personal space, for fear of being emotionally hurt again. In extreme
cases, physically and/or emotionally abused persons build walls around
themselves that are too high to climb over and too thick to penetrate in an
attempt to protect themselves against any further physical or psychological
pain.
Territorial boundaries are also aﬀected by where people live. In societies
where people live in close quarters, they establish smaller personal boundaries
out of necessity. Conversely, people who are accustomed to wide-open spaces
create larger personal spaces. Mental health can also aﬀect personal space. Ted
Kaczynski, the Unabomber, lived in an isolated cabin in Montana. He
perceived anyone who came within half a mile of his cabin as a threat and
prepared to defend himself against those who encroached on his personal
space.
Because people have such wide variations in what they consider “their”
territory and personal space, it is important that you take this into
consideration when attempting to make friends with someone you do not
know. After sending out friend signals, and receiving like signals in return,
approach the individual carefully and observe their body language as you do. If
the individual shows signs of stress or negative reactions, such as backing away
or disapproving facial expressions, stop your forward progress and do not move
closer to that person until he or she gives you verbal or nonverbal clues that
they are ready for that.
People tend to be slow to yield personal territory, especially when it comes
to parking spaces. When you have been driving circles in a crowded parking
lot, looking for a spot, and ﬁnally see someone getting ready to leave, you
immediately activate your turn signal to mark your turf. You are eﬀectively
telling other drivers to back oﬀ because this is your parking space. Now the
waiting game begins. e driver who is about to pull out of the space ﬁdgets
and ﬁddles with various gadgets mounted on the dashboard, painstakingly
taking his or her time to properly adjust the seat belt and mirrors. You ask
yourself, “What’s taking this person so long to pull out?” e answer is that
they are masters of their space and will not surrender it until they are good and
ready. Interestingly, people leave parking spaces sooner if no one is waiting to
pull in.
DOGMATIC VIEW OF TERRITORIAL FOE SIGNALS
Pets, particularly dogs, provide interesting examples of territorial behavior. For
example, two people enter a friend’s house for the ﬁrst time. One person is an
avid dog lover and the other individual hates dogs. e dog lover immediately
focuses his or her attention on the dog, looks the dog directly in the eyes, and
bends down to pet the animal. To the dog lover’s surprise, the canine growls
and bares its teeth. e dog hater, on the other hand, limits physical and visual
contact with the dog. To the dog hater’s chagrin, the animal approaches, sniﬀs,
and eagerly seeks his attention.
e dog’s reaction to the two strangers seems counterintuitive, but when
viewed from a territorial perspective, it makes perfect sense. e dog lover
violated the animal’s physical space by moving toward it and further challenged
the animal by looking directly into its eyes at ground level. Both dogs and
humans perceive staring as a threatening (foe signal) gesture. e dog viewed
the canine lover’s presence as a threat or a potential threat; therefore, the dog
presented an aggressive threat to protect its territory. With familiarity, the dog
lover will eventually be accepted. Conversely, the dog hater ignored the animal
and consequently posed no territorial threat. Without an actual or perceived
threat, the dog became intrigued by the stranger. In an eﬀort to satisfy natural
curiosity (the same “hook” that got Vladimir to talk to me and Seagull
interested in Charles, the FBI agent), the dog approached the person who
hated it.
BEFORE YOU START WALKING, LET THEIR FEET DO THE TALKING
All right, you’ve got a working knowledge of friend and foe signals, and you
know which ones to display and look for when dealing with strangers you want
to either approach or avoid—maybe you’ve even practiced your nonverbal
signals in front of a mirror. ere’s one more thing to consider before you
actually start speaking with anybody, and that has to do with situations where
your person of interest is not alone but already interacting with others. How
do you break in and start a conversation? When should you break in and begin
talking?
ere are times when you won’t be able to answer such questions. For
example, at business meetings or social events where people are seated at tables
or when they are moving about the room, seamlessly integrating into ongoing
conversations can be diﬃcult. However, if two or more people are standing
together and socially interacting, then you can use foot behavior to help
determine whether it is a good time to approach the group or, conversely, if it
is a better idea to delay your eﬀort to make contact. is is because observing
foot positions oﬀers clues as to which group will accept a new member and
which will be reluctant or unwilling to do so.
Members of a large group who form a semicircle with their feet pointing
toward the open side of the circle are signaling that they are willing to accept
new members. Members of a large group who form a closed circle are signaling
they are not going to be receptive to adding new individuals to their gathering.
If you see two people who are facing each other—each with their feet
pointing toward the other person—they are telegraphing the message that their
conversation is private. Stay away. ey do not want outsiders to interrupt. On
the other hand, if two people are facing each other with their feet askew, this
leaves an “opening” and sends the message that they are willing to admit a new
person to their group.
Feet telegraphing a private conversation.
Feet askew invites other people to join the conversation.
When three people face each other and their feet are pointed inward
forming a closed circle, they are nonverbally communicating an unwillingness
to accept new members.
Conversely, when three people face each other and assume a wider circle,
opening up space, they are signaling they are willing to have others join their
group.
Closed conversation
The members of this group are standing with their feet askew, which sends the message that they are willing to
admit a new person to their group.
Your job is to identify groups that are open to new members and make your
approach. Purposefully walk toward the group and display friend signals either
before or during the approach. Recall that our brains are constantly scanning
the environment for friend or foe cues. If you exhibit foe signals, the people in
the group you are approaching are going to defend themselves against a
possible threat and be hostile to your intrusion. If these same individuals see
you exhibiting eyebrow ﬂashes, head tilts, and a smile, they are going to
interpret these friend signals as positive and are more likely to welcome you
into their gathering.
When you reach the group you have chosen, conﬁdently step into the
empty space. Conﬁdent people are more liked than people who are not self-
assured. Even if you don’t feel conﬁdent, fake it as best you can. A ﬁne line
exists between self-conﬁdence and arrogance. Don’t cross it!
When you enter the once-empty space, listen to the conversation thread
and wait for a pause before saying anything. While you are listening, you
should slightly nod your head. Nodding signals approval and interest in what
the other individuals are saying and also sends the message that you are
conﬁdent, not arrogant. Arrogant people are typically not good listeners. e
group may be willing to accept new members, but no one likes a newcomer
who rudely interrupts an ongoing conversation. When a natural pause in the
conversation occurs, this is your cue to introduce yourself or add to the
conversation you have been listening to.
Try to ﬁnd common ground with the other members of the group. Finding
common ground (similar interests, backgrounds, jobs, etc.) is the quickest way
to develop rapport and kick your friend-making process into high gear.
Techniques to quickly build rapport will be discussed in detail in a later
chapter. If you are at a trade show or conference, you have instant common
ground because everybody at that event shares common interests or else they
wouldn’t be there in the ﬁrst place.
If common ground cannot be readily established, default to the topic of
music. Almost everyone likes music. Even if people do not like the same music,
the similarities and diﬀerences between music genres can foster lively and
usually noncontroversial conversations. You don’t want to discuss topics that
have the potential to create strong feelings and potential conﬂicts, as these can
prove divisive and are antithetical to nurturing budding friendships.
When you see these people later in the event, call them by their names. It
will mean a lot to them. How much? In the words of Dale Carnegie:
“Remember that a person’s name is to that person the sweetest and most
important sound in any language.” People like to be remembered.
Remembering a person’s name assigns them value and recognition and shows
that you care. ings remembered are things cherished.
CONVERSATIONAL BRIDGE-BACKS
When encountering individuals you met earlier, you can employ a
conversational bridge-back. is refers to your use of portions of earlier
discussions at a later time. Conversational bridge-backs can be comments,
jokes, gestures, or other things unique to the earlier conversation. Using a
conversational bridge-back sends the subtle message that you are not a
newcomer to the person’s circle of friends and acquaintances. You are a familiar
person with mutual interests. Conversational bridge-backs also allow you to
pick up the friend-building process where it left oﬀ at the end of the ﬁrst
conversation. at, in turn, allows you to move forward in your friendship
building without having to start out from scratch.
FOOT BEHAVIORAL CUES WHEN A PERSON IS ALONE
If you see a person standing alone and his or her feet are pointed toward the
exit, there’s a good chance that they are thinking about leaving but haven’t yet
made the move. is provides you with an opening to approach that person.
Give friend signals as you approach and then make an empathic statement
(discussed in the next chapter) like “Oh, I see you’re ready to leave” or “Oh,
you ﬁnd the party boring.” You can use such a statement because you are just
describing the physical stance you have observed, which reﬂects that
individual’s inner feelings. Or you might walk up and simply say, “Oh, I see
you’re here by yourself today. What do you think of the place (or event)?”
Hopefully, the person will respond to your inquiry, and you can use the
response to continue the conversation and see how things go from there.
OUT OF THE FIREFLY AND INTO THE FRIENDSHIP: THE NEXT STEP
e making of a friend or foe begins at the ﬁrst moment of contact, usually
visual, and moves forward from there. is chapter has focused almost
exclusively on the nonverbal signals we send out to others and the impact they
have on personal relationships. Because people normally see us before they hear
us, our nonverbal signals are like “coming attractions” or “trailers” for movies,
giving the viewer advance notice of what they can expect from the main
attraction and helping them decide if it’s worth their time to pursue or avoid.
DON’T BASK IN THIS SPOTLIGHT!
If you use your friend signals eﬀectively, you will have set the stage for a
successful interaction to follow. Getting another person’s attention and, at the
same time, encouraging them to see you in a positive light is a critical ﬁrst step
on the path to making friends, but you need to be careful to not bask in the
spotlight. Intentionally sending friend (or foe) signals takes practice.
Subconsciously, people are very adept at transmitting these nonverbal
communications. However, now that you have read about these signals and are
aware of them, you will begin to notice other people sending and receiving
them and, from time to time, you will catch yourself in the act of signaling
others.
In order to consciously imitate the same signals you subconsciously send with
ease and authenticity, you must overcome the spotlight eﬀect. e spotlight
eﬀect triggers when you do something surreptitiously and, because you are
making a conscious eﬀort to inﬂuence people’s behavior, you think that
everybody is aware of what you are doing. is, in turn, makes it diﬃcult for
you to make your behavior appear natural and appropriate, resulting in an
inability to perform your actions in a convincing manner. e end result: Your
actions are not believable or believed.
An example of the spotlight eﬀect in action involves someone who lies. e
liar thinks that the person he is lying to can see right through the lie, even
when that individual is totally unaware of the deception. is, in turn, causes
the liar to display verbal and nonverbal cues that actually indicate deception,
allowing the person on the receiving end of the lie to detect the deception or,
at least, become suspicious of what is being said.
e same thing happens when you ﬁrst attempt to consciously imitate
friend signals. You’ve been successfully sending these signals throughout your
life; yet, the ﬁrst few times you approach people and consciously attempt to tilt
your head and display an eyebrow ﬂash, you will think they know you’re
socially awkward. e spotlight eﬀect takes hold. is causes you to “force” the
behavior—your head tilts and eyebrow ﬂashes become awkward—and your
intentions are revealed, leaving you as the victim of your own self-fulﬁlling
prophecy . . . and a failed attempt to make a friend. If you want to avoid the
spotlight eﬀect, you ﬁrst have to know of its existence.
Now you do.
THE NONVERBAL TWO-STEP
During my FBI career, I attended many conferences and parties. On one
occasion, I attended a pre-conference “get-to-know-you party” with a fellow
member of the Behavioral Analysis Program. e party became boring, so my
friend and I amused ourselves by playing “nonverbal footrace.”
e game worked like this: We each selected partygoers who were at an
equal distance from the door. e object of the game was to see who could get
their selected target to cross the threshold of the door without them realizing
what they were doing. We initially engaged each of our targets in casual
conversation at an acceptable physical distance. Knowing that people
unconsciously try to maintain a comfortable distance from the person they are
talking to, we took imperceptible steps closer to our targets. As the space
between us and our targets closed, they unconsciously stepped backward to
maintain their personal space. We repeated this maneuver until our targets
passed the doorjamb. e ﬁrst person to accomplish this was declared the
winner. In one instance, I backed my target into the lobby of the hotel without
his conscious awareness. When he realized where he was, he exclaimed,
“Whoosh! How did we get out here?” I just smiled and shrugged my shoulders.
e ﬁrst step in successfully imitating friend (or foe) signals is to watch how
other people naturally display these signals and, also, to monitor your own
signals. When you imitate a friend signal, try to duplicate the same sensation
you feel when you catch yourself automatically displaying these nonverbal
communications.
A good place to hone these skills is walking down the street, in shopping
malls, and in other public places. When a person approaches, tilt your head,
make eye contact, and smile. Watch the person’s reaction. If the individual
returns an eyebrow ﬂash along with a smile, you have successfully transmitted
a friend signal. If the person gives you a goofy look or a “get away from me,
you creep” expression, you might have chosen a sourpuss or need more
practice. Over time, you should see an improvement in how people respond to
your friend signals. Further, with practice, you won’t have to consciously think
about sending the signals or how they look; they will become automatic.
Acquiring new skills, or making old skills look authentic when we use them
“in the spotlight,” takes lots of practice. While working to perfect these signals,
you might become discouraged and give up for various reasons, including
embarrassment, lack of immediate mastery of the new skills, or frustration.
is is normal. In studying how people acquire new skills, scientists have
discovered that many novices experience a period of “free fall” early in the
learning experience. During this time, individuals are not comfortable using
the new skills and become frustrated or embarrassed when the skills do not
work as advertised. Instead of continuing to practice the skills, they give up.
Don’t you be one of those people! Persevere through this free-fall phase,
conﬁdent in the knowledge that you will achieve skill mastery with time and
eﬀort. e frustration and discomfort of acquiring new skills will be well worth
the eﬀort because you will be rewarded with superior results in achieving
successful relationships.
at should make smiling very easy to do, consciously or otherwise!
TO ERR IS HUMAN . . . AND MAKES THAT HUMAN MORE LIKABLE, TOO
At the beginning of my lectures, I intentionally make several mistakes that don’t damage my credibility, such as
mispronouncing a word or misspelling a word on the whiteboard. The participants immediately correct my small
errors. With a show of embarrassment, I graciously accept the correction and credit the participants for being
attentive.
This technique accomplishes several objectives. First, the participants making the corrections feel good
about themselves, which builds rapport and friendship. Second, participants are more likely to spontaneously
interact during the lecture without the fear of looking stupid in front of the instructor. After all, they reason, it’s
okay to make mistakes because the instructor already has made several himself. Third, minor mistakes make
me look human. People like lecturers who are subject matter experts yet at the same time possess human
qualities similar to the seminar participants (the Law of Similarity, discussed in Chapter 5).
OBSERVE AND LEARN
Tapping on a cell phone keyboard and having earbuds in place shuts you out
of the sending or receiving of friendship signals. And the lack of personal
interaction with other people reduces the opportunity for you to sharpen your
social skills or learn from observing others.
Learning from others doesn’t even take much eﬀort. All you need to do is
go to a restaurant and people-watch. People feel comfortable communicating
when they are eating or drinking. See if you can determine the status and
intensity of relationships by observing the non verbal signals of nearby couples.
ROMANTIC RELATIONSHIPS
When two people walk into a restaurant you can tell if they are a couple or not
by observing their nonverbal behaviors. Hand holding is a sign of romantic
interest. Couples who hold hands without interlacing their ﬁngers indicate a
less intimate relationship than if they hold hands with their ﬁngers interlaced.
e following sequence of actions typically takes place after the couple sits at a
table or booth: 1) the center piece, menu stand, or condiment rack is moved to
one side of the table, 2) the couple exchange eyebrow ﬂashes, 3) the couple
look at each other for a longer time than they would look at strangers, 4) they
smile, 5) they tilt their heads to one side or the other, 6) they lean in toward
each other, 7) they mirror each other’s posture, 8) they hold hands, 9) they
freely use gestures when they communicate, 10) they whisper, or lower their
voices, to signal to others that the conversation is private and intruders are not
welcome, and 11) they share food. is sequence of activity may not take place
in the exact order listed or may be interrupted by waitstaﬀ, but you will
observe some or all of these nonverbal cues at some point during the course of
dinner.
BROKEN RELATIONSHIPS
Relationships that are strained will become obvious because the normal
nonverbal cues present in a good relationship will be absent. For example, the
couple will not look at each other. eir smiles are forced. One or both will
often look at their plates when they speak. Heads are erect, not tilted. eir
eyes are sweeping across the restaurant looking for other stimuli. ey don’t
mirror each other’s postures. ey don’t lean toward one another; in fact, they
are usually leaning backward, away from each other.
SPLIT RELATIONSHIPS
A nonverbal sequence that indicates that one member of the couple is
interested in the other person but the other person is not interested in them is
not hard to spot. e interested person displays all the nonverbal cues present
in a romantic relationship as previously described; however, the other person is
displaying negative nonverbal cues (foe signals).
The man is displaying nonverbal cues indicating interest; the female is not.
QUIET COMFORT
Couples who have spent many years together often display nonverbal cues that
signal a bad or broken relationship, but this is not always the case. People who
spend a long time in each other’s company are conﬁdent that the other person
is committed to the relationship. ey don’t need constant reminders. ey are
relaxed and comfortable in each other’s company without the fear of betrayal
or abandonment. Watching couples interact with one another when they reach
this stage in their relationship is a wonder to behold.
ese same observational relationship evaluations can be made with
businesspeople making deals, people trying to pick someone up, or just friends
out for a casual meal or drink. e point of people-watching is to sharpen your
observation skills, allowing you to become more aware of how people naturally
interact with one another and enhance your ability to accurately interpret what
you see. If you practice enough, your observations and skills in evaluating
human behavior will become automatic, thus making you a more eﬀective
communicator.
3
THE GOLDEN RULE OF FRIENDSHIP
You can make more friends in two months by becoming genuinely interested in other
people than you can in two years by trying to get other people interested in you.
—DALE CARNEGIE
e nonverbal friend signals you learned in the previous chapter are designed
to set the stage for the start of a positive relationship with another person.  ey
function like a comedian whose warm-up act is designed to get the audience in
the right frame of mind before the headliner makes his appearance. Used
correctly, these signals will make your person of interest more receptive to
interacting with you, should you choose to approach and speak with them. So
let’s assume you do choose to make contact with somebody. What now? You
have reached your “moment of truth” with them.
MAKING YOUR “MOMENT OF TRUTH” A SUCCESS
Many years ago, a businessman named Jan Carlzon was named CEO of a
struggling European airline company, Scandinavian Airlines System (SAS), and
given the formidable task of making it proﬁtable. He accomplished this
objective with such speed that his feat became the focal point of management
cases and literature highlighting business turnarounds.
How did he achieve such success? By giving his frontline staﬀ the power to
solve customer service problems on the spot, without having to check with
their supervisors ﬁrst. is greatly improved customer satisfaction, employee
morale, and corporate proﬁt . . . a  win-win situation for all involved.
What was interesting about Carlzon’s philosophy and business strategy, as it
relates to this book, is the importance he put on the point of contact between
two individuals. In fact, he called it a “moment of truth” because it was these
moments that shaped a customer’s view of the company and helped determine
if they would purchase SAS services. Carlzon observed: “Last year each of our
ten million customers came in contact with approximately ﬁve SAS employees.
ese 50 million ‘moments of truth’ are the moments that ultimately
determine whether SAS will succeed or fail as a company. ey are the
moments when we must prove to our customers that SAS is their best
alternative.”
When you meet another person for the ﬁrst time, it is a deﬁning moment
of truth in how that relationship will develop. Will that person treat you like a
friend or shun you like a foe? e Golden Rule of Friendship—If you want people
to like you, make them feel good about  themselves—can be a deciding factor in
which side the person puts you on.
Unlike some of the techniques that will be presented later, which only
become relevant when you are looking for long-term relationships rather than
brief or sporadic interactions, the Golden Rule of Friendship serves as the key
to all successful relationships, whether they are of short, medium, or long
duration.
Do not underestimate the power and importance of this rule in making
friends. As an FBI Special Agent, I was required to meet people from every
station in life and convince them to provide sensitive information, become
spies, or confess to a variety of crimes. e key to the successful completion of
these daunting tasks was my ability to get people to not only like me but to
trust me and, in many cases, trust me with their lives. e most diﬃcult task
facing new Special Agents bent on getting people to like them is developing
this vital skill. Agents often approached me and asked me to teach them the
techniques to get people to like them instantly. And I gave them the exact same
instruction: If you want people to like you, make them feel good about themselves.
You must focus your attention on the person you are befriending. It sounds
easy, but it takes practice even for trained agents. If you make someone feel
good about themselves, they will credit you with helping them attain that good
feeling. People gravitate toward individuals who make them happy and tend to
avoid people who bring them pain or discomfort.
If every time you meet a person you make them feel good about themselves,
he or she will seek out every opportunity to see you again to experience those
same good feelings. e stumbling block many of my fellow agents confronted
in achieving this objective is the same one we all encounter: our own ego.
People’s egos get in the way of practicing the Golden Rule of Friendship. Most
people think the world revolves around them and they should be the center of
attention. But if you want to appear friendly and attractive to others, you must
forgo your ego and pay attention to the other person and his or her particular
needs and circumstances. Other people will like you when you make them (not
you) the focus of attention.
ink about it: It is unfortunate that we seldom use this powerful rule for
making ourselves more attractive to others while, at the same time, making
those individuals feel better about themselves. We are too busy focusing on
ourselves and not on the people we meet. We put our wants and needs before
the wants and needs of others. e irony of all this is that other people will be
eager to fulﬁll your wants and needs if they like you.
TECHNIQUES TO MAKE PEOPLE FEEL GOOD ABOUT THEMSELVES:
EMPATHIC STATEMENTS
Empathic statements keep the focus of the conversation on the person you are
talking with rather than on yourself. ey are one of the most eﬀective ways to
make people feel good about themselves. Keeping the focus on the other
person is diﬃcult because we are, by nature, ego centric and think the world
revolves around us. Nevertheless, if every time you talk to people they feel
good about themselves, you will have successfully achieved the objective of the
Golden Rule of Friendship and people will like you as a result.
Empathic statements such as “You look like you are having a bad day” or
“You look happy today” let people know that someone is listening to them and
cares to some degree about their well-being. is kind of attention makes us
feel good about ourselves and, more important, predisposes us to like the
person who gave us the attention.
Empathic statements also close the discourse cycle. When a person says
something, they want feedback to know if their message was received and
understood. Mirroring back what a person says using parallel language closes
the communication circle. People feel good about themselves when they
successfully communicate a message.
Constructing empathic statements requires you to carefully listen to the
other person. Concentrated listening demonstrates that you are really
interested in the other person and understand what they are  saying.
e basic formula for constructing empathic statements is “So you . . .”
ere are many ways to form empathic statements but this basic formula gets
you in the habit of keeping the focus of the conversation on the other person
and away from you. Simple empathic statements might include “So you like
the way things are going today,” or “So you are having a good day.” We
naturally tend to say something to the eﬀect of “I understand how you feel.”
e other person then automatically thinks, No, you don’t know how I feel
because you are not me. e basic “So you . . .” formula ensures that the focus of
the conversation remains on the other person. For example, you get on an
elevator and see a person who is smiling and looks happy. You can naturally
say, “So, things are going your way today,” mirroring back their physical
nonverbal cues.
When using empathic statements to achieve the objective of the Golden
Rule of Friendship, avoid repeating back word for word what the person said.
Since people rarely do this, when it occurs the repetition is processed by the
brain of the listener as abnormal behavior and causes a defensive reaction. is
is the exact opposite eﬀect of what you are trying to achieve by using empathic
statements. Parroting another person’s statement can also sound patronizing
and condescending. Don’t do it!
Empathic statements keep the focus of the conversation on the other person
and make them feel good about themselves. And using empathic statements is
a simple yet eﬀective technique that will have people seeking you out to be
their friend, because every time they converse with you, you make them feel
good about themselves. And, best of all, people will not know you are using
this technique, because they naturally think they deserve the attention and will
not see your actions as being out of the ordinary (it will pass their territory
scan without arousing any attention). Once you have mastered constructing
empathic statements using the basic formula, you can construct more
sophisticated empathic statements by dropping the “So you . . .”
BEN AND VICKI’S EMPATHIC STATEMENT ADVENTURE
Let’s look at how a conversation might work using the techniques discussed
thus far. Using the standard friend signals, Ben sends a nonverbal invitation to
Vicki, who is standing near the bar with several friends. Vicki nonverbally
accepts Ben’s invitation. As Ben approaches Vicki, he notes that she is smiling
and laughing with her friends.
BEN: Hi, my name is Ben? What’s yours?
VICKI: Hi, my name is Vicki.
BEN: So you look like you are really having fun tonight. (basic empathic statement)
VICKI: I sure am. I really needed a night out.
Once you have mastered constructing empathic statements using the basic
formula, you can construct more sophisticated empathic statements by
dropping the “So you . . .” Let’s revisit Ben’s conversation with Vicki using
sophisticated empathic statements instead of the basic formula.
BEN: Hi, my name is Ben. What’s yours?
VICKI: Hi, my name is Vicki.
BEN: You look like you’re really having fun tonight. (sophisticated empathic statement)
VICKI: I sure am. I really need a night out.
BEN: en you’ve been really busy lately. (sophisticated empathic statement)
VICKI: Yeah, I worked sixty hours a week for the last three weeks getting a project done.
With either approach, Ben recognized that Vicki was smiling and laughing,
two physical signs that she was enjoying herself. Ben constructed an empathic
statement that reﬂected her emotional status. Ben achieved several things.
First, he communicated to Vicki that he took an interest in her feelings.
Second, he focused the conversation on her. ird, Vicki’s response lets Ben
know in which direction to steer the conversation. Her response, “I sure am. I
really need a night out,” indicates that Vicki experienced some type of stress
during the week or in the recent past. Ben does not know what that stress was,
but he can construct another empathic statement to explore the reasons for her
stress in a noninvasive way. By doing so, he continues to keep the focus of the
conversation on Vicki and lets her know that he is still interested in her and
her emotional feelings. Vicki will not recognize that Ben is using a series of
empathic statements because this kind of behavior is perceived by the brain as
“normal behavior” and doesn’t arouse suspicion or a defensive reaction.
Further, Vicki subconsciously thinks she should be the center of attention (we
all do!) and she is delighted that Ben is giving her his undivided attention. is
makes her feel good about herself and increases the probability that she will
like Ben, according to the Golden Rule of Friendship.
USING EMPATHIC STATEMENTS TO KEEP CONV ERSATIONS GOING
Empathic statements also serve as eﬀective conversation ﬁllers. e awkward
silence that comes when the other person stops talking and you cannot think
of anything to say is devastating. When you are struggling for something to
say, fall back on the empathic statement. All you have to remember is the last
thing the person said and construct an empathic statement based on that
information. e speaker will carry the conversation, giving you time to think
of something meaningful to say. It is far better to use a series of empathic
statements when you have nothing to say than to say something inappropriate.
Remember: e person you are talking to will not realize that you are using
empathic statements because they will be processed as “normal” by the
listener’s brain and will go unnoticed.
FLATTERY/COMPLIMENTS
A ﬁne line separates ﬂattery from compliments. e word ﬂattery has a more
negative connotation than the term compliment. Flattery is often associated
with insincere compliments used to exploit and manipulate others for selﬁsh
reasons. e purpose of compliments is to praise others and acknowledge their
accomplishments. As relationships grow and develop, compliments play an
ever-increasing role in the bonding of two individuals. Compliments signal
that the other person is still interested in you and what you do well.
One of the pitfalls of using compliments in ﬂedgling relationships is that
you do not know the person well enough to be sincere. Insincere compliments
and ﬂattery are one and the same and will give the person receiving the false
accolade a negative impression of you. After all, no one likes to feel they are
being manipulated or lied to. People know what they are good at and where
they are weak. If you tell someone that they are good at something and they
know they aren’t, they are likely to question your motive because they
recognize the discrepancy between your assessment of them and the way they
really perform.
An alternate, and vastly superior, method of using compliments exists. is
approach avoids the pitfalls inherent in complimenting another person and
instead allows others to compliment themselves. is technique avoids the
problem of appearing insincere. When people compliment themselves,
sincerity is not an issue, and people rarely miss an opportunity to compliment
themselves if given the opportunity (which you conveniently provide).
e key to allowing people to compliment themselves is to construct a
dialogue that predisposes people to recognize their attributes or
accomplishments and give themselves a silent pat on the back. When people
compliment themselves, they feel good about themselves, and according to the
Golden Rule of Friendship, they will like you because you provided the
opportunity to make them feel good about themselves.
Referring back to Ben’s ﬂedgling relationship with Vicki, he can set the
stage for Vicki to compliment herself.
BEN: en you’ve been really busy lately. (sophisticated empathic statement)
VICKI: Yeah, I worked sixty hours a week for the last three weeks getting a project done.
BEN: It takes a lot of dedication and determination to commit to a project of that magnitude. (a
statement that provides Vicki the opportunity to compliment herself)
VICKI: (inking) I sacriﬁced a lot to get that mega project done and I did a very good job, if I
may say so myself.
Note that Ben did not directly tell Vicki he thought she was a dedicated
and determined person. However, it was not hard for Vicki to recognize those
attributes in herself and apply them to her circumstances at work. In the event
Vicki does not see herself as a dedicated and determined person, no damage
will be done to the ﬂedgling relationship. What Ben said is true regardless of
Vicki’s self-assessment, so his comment at worst will go unnoticed, and at best
will provide the impetus for Vicki to feel good about herself (and Ben). Based
on human nature, even if Vicki was in reality not a dedicated and determined
person, she would likely apply those favorable attributes to herself. Few people
would admit in public, much less to themselves, that they are not dedicated,
determined people.
THIRD-PARTY COMPLIMENTS
You can use a third party to compliment a person you want to  befriend—
without doing it yourself—and still get the “credit” for making the target of your
compliment feel good about themselves and, by extension, feel good about
you. When you directly compliment other people, particularly anybody who
suspects you might want something from them (for example: your date, your
boss, or a friend), they tend to discount your eﬀorts because they suspect you
are intentionally trying to inﬂuence them through ﬂattery. A third-party
compliment eliminates this skepticism.
To construct a third-party compliment you will need to ﬁnd a mutual
friend or acquaintance who knows both you and your person of interest.
Further, you should be relatively certain that the third-party individual you
choose will be likely to pass along your compliment to the person for whom it
was intended. If this transmission of information is successful, the next time
you meet your person of interest, he or she will see you from a positive
perspective. Consider the following exchange and assume you are Mark.
MIKE: I met Mark the other day. He told me he thinks you’re really bright. In fact, he said
you’re one of the most capable problem solvers he has ever met.
SONJA: Oh, really? He said that?
MIKE: at’s what he told me.
Sonja will more readily accept this compliment as related by Mike than if
you (Mark) directly told her the same thing. Additionally, Mike feels free to
tell Sonja exactly what you said, which you may or may not be socially allowed
to say at the beginning stages of a relationship. Indirectly you, through Mike,
allowed Sonja to compliment herself, which makes her feel good about herself,
thus predisposing her to like you before you meet her for the ﬁrst time or at
the point in your relationship when she receives Mike’s third-party
compliment.
CASHING IN ON THIRD-PARTY COMPLIMENTS AT WORK
Beyond the dating landscape, I found third-party compliments to be very
eﬀective in the workplace. A case in point: Money to fund operations within
the FBI is competitive; consequently, not every proposal gets funded. To
improve the probability that my proposals would be approved I would employ
the third-party-compliment strategy.
Several weeks before my proposal was scheduled to be reviewed by the
newly appointed assistant director, I sought out the most notorious gossip in
the oﬃce and casually mentioned to him that it was about time our ﬁeld oﬃce
got an assistant director who ﬁnally knew what he was doing. I also
commented that the new assistant director was a clever man with keen insights
into operational strategies. For gossips, the coin of the realm is information. In
their eyes, they gain value by spreading information they hear to the
individuals who would have interest in hearing it. Sure enough, the boss soon
heard of my comments “through the grapevine.” e assistant director was
more likely to accept this compliment as sincere from a third-party individual
than directly from me. Besides, I did not have access to the assistant director, as
I was in the ﬁeld at the time.
When the assistant director reviewed my proposals, he was pre disposed to
look at them more favorably because of his knowledge of how I viewed him. I
had made him feel good about himself, a fulﬁllment of the Golden Rule of
Friendship, and I had done it in a way that didn’t arouse his suspicions. ird-
party compliments are within normal behavioral parameters and pass a person’s
“territory scan” without arousing an alert. So I had nothing to lose. If my
strategy failed, the downside risk was zero, because I would have lost the
funding anyway. If the technique worked, the upside is successfully achieving
what I wanted. As it tu rned out, most of my proposals were funded.
THIRD PARTY AND THE “PRIMACY EFFECT”
Words cannot change reality, but they can change how people perceive reality.
Words create ﬁlters through which people view the world around them. A
single word can make the diﬀerence between liking and disliking a person.
Consider this example: Your friend Calvin tells you about your new
neighbor, Bill, whom you are meeting for the ﬁrst time. Calvin says, “Your new
neighbor, Bill, is not very trustworthy; in fact, when you shake hands, check
your ﬁngers to make sure he hasn’t taken any.” How are you going to view Bill
when you ﬁrst are introduced? e problem is you have already been
encouraged to prejudge him as untrustworthy through what behavioral
scientists refer to as the “primacy eﬀect.” If a friend describes the person you
are about to meet for the ﬁrst time as untrustworthy, you will be predisposed
to view that person as untrustworthy, regardless of the person’s actual level of
trustworthiness. ereafter, you will tend to view everything that person says
or does as untrustworthy.
Conversely, say your friend Calvin tells you that your new neighbor, Bill, “is
very friendly, gregarious, and has a great sense of humor . . . you’re going to
love him.” How are you going to view Bill now? You will likely see Bill as
friendly, regardless of his degree of friendliness.
Overcoming negative or positive perceptions you might have toward a
speciﬁc individual because of what you were told by someone else (particularly
if you respect and/or like that person) is diﬃcult, but not impossible to
achieve. e more times you meet the “untrustworthy” Bill and do not
experience instances of untrustworthiness, the more likely you are to see him as
trustworthy, thus overcoming the original negativity created by the primacy
eﬀect. However, you are less likely to give a person labeled “untrustworthy” a
chance to prove the label wrong because your desire to see the person a second
time will be reduced.
If you meet the “friendly” Bill several times and do not experience
friendliness, then you will tend to excuse away the unfriendly behavior. Such
excuses might include “He must be having a bad day” or “I must have caught
him at a bad time.” An unfriendly person initially described as friendly gains
an advantage from the primacy eﬀect because people tend to allow the
unfriendly person multiple opportunities to demonstrate friendliness despite
numerous displays of unfriendly behavior.
It is precisely because the primacy eﬀect can be so powerful that we can use
it as one of our tools for shaping friendships or getting people to see us as we
want to be seen. What you are doing with the primacy eﬀect is sending a
message that will predispose somebody to see someone else in a way that you
want them to be perceived.
TAKING THE PRIMACY EFFECT TO THE BANK
I often employed the primacy eﬀect during interrogations of people suspected
of committing crimes. I remember one case where we were interviewing a
possible bank robber. ere were two of us and the suspect sitting in the
interrogation room. Early in the interview, my partner excused himself, saying
he had to make a telephone call. Actually, his departure was part of our plan
that allowed me to be alone with the suspect so I could speak with him
privately.
I told the suspect, “You’re lucky to have my partner on the job. He’s honest
and fair. He’ll listen without prejudice to your side of the story.” en I sat
back, waiting for my partner to return. A few moments later, before he actually
returned, I added, “e thing about my partner—I guess he can aﬀord to be
fair. e guy’s a human lie detector. I don’t know how he does it, but he knows
when someone is lying. No matter what the subject is or who is talking, the
man can tell if someone is being dishonest.” What I did through my last
comment was to create a ﬁlter through which I wanted the suspect to view my
partner. I employed the primacy eﬀect to shape his assessment of my partner’s
skills.
When my partner returned to the room, he already knew that he was to
remain silent until I asked the suspect, “Did you rob the bank?” If the man
said, “No,” my partner was instructed to look at the suspect like “You’ve got to
be kidding” and give him a skeptical look.
So, what happened? I asked the guy, “Did you rob the bank?” and he said,
“No.” My partner responded by saying, “What?” with a skeptical look. And—
this is the truth—the suspect took his hand, slapped it on the table, and said,
“Damn, he’s good!” and went on to confess to the crime.
BEWARE OF THE PRIMACY EFFECT IN BIASING YOUR OWN BEHAVIOR
Using the primacy eﬀect is a great idea when you’re using it to inﬂuence others,
but be aware that it can cut both ways. If you’re not careful, the primacy eﬀect
can cause you to be prejudicial in your own behavior toward others, leading to
inaccurate and misleading beliefs about their behavior.
In my early days as an FBI agent, I fell victim to the primacy eﬀect. I was
given the task of interviewing a suspect who, my colleague informed me, had
kidnapped a four-year-old girl. Before talking to the suspect, my thoughts were
already ﬁltered through my colleague’s statement, and by the time I actually
met the man, I had already made up my mind that he was the kidnapper.
Consequently, everything the suspect said or did I viewed through my “ﬁlter”
as an indication of guilt . . . d espite ample evidence to the contrary.
e more pressure I put on the suspect, the more nervous he became, not
because he was guilty, but because I did not believe him and he thought he
would go to prison for something he didn’t do. e more nervous the suspect
became, the more it reinforced my initial belief that he was the kidnapper, and
the more pressure I applied. It was no surprise that the interview spiraled out
of control. In the end, I was embarrassed when the real kidnapper was caught.
e next time you conduct an interview, meet a new colleague, or buy a
new product, think about how you came to form your opinion about that
person or product. Chances are high that your opinions were formed by
primacy.
e acceptance of employees who transfer from one oﬃce to another often
depends on the reputation that precedes their arrival . . . just as you are
convinced that the new brand of toothpaste you purchased has to be good
because four out of ﬁve dentists recommended it.
e primacy eﬀect is powerful. Use it wisely.
ASKING A FAVOR
Good old Ben Franklin, the guy on the hundred-dollar bill, observed that if he
asked a colleague for a favor, the colleague liked him more than if he hadn’t
made the request. is phenomenon became known as (no surprise here) the
Ben Franklin eﬀect.
At ﬁrst glance, this ﬁnding seems counterintuitive. Shouldn’t you like the
person more for doing you the favor than the other way around? It turns out,
such is not the case. When a person does someone a favor, they feel good about
themselves. e Golden Rule of Friendship states that if you make a person
feel good about themselves, they will like you. us, asking someone to do you
a favor is not all about you. It is also about the person doing you the favor.
A warning, however: Do not overuse this technique, because Ben Franklin
also observed that “guests, like ﬁsh, begin to smell after three days.” (As do
people who ask too many favors!)
Returning to Ben’s encounter with Vicki, he can use this “ask a favor”
technique during his conversation with the young woman.
BEN: It takes a lot of dedication and determination to commit to a project of that magnitude.
(allowing Vicki to compliment herself)
VICKI: Yeah. (thinking) I sure am dedicated and determined. I sacriﬁced a lot to get that mega-
project done and I did a very good job if I may say so myself.
BEN: Vicki, could you do me a favor and watch my drink while I go to the bathroom? (asks for
a favor)
VICKI: Sure, no problem.
Ben addressed Vicki by her ﬁrst name (recall that people like the sound of
their name and the fact that someone remembers it) and then asked her to do
him a small favor. ese small behaviors predispose Vicki to like Ben because
people who do favors for others feel good about themselves.
COMBINING FRIENDSHIP TOOLS TO ENHANCE RELATIONSHIP
EFFECTIVENESS
Depending on the circumstances, you might ﬁnd yourself using one or a
combination of several techniques presented in this book to make a new
friend. e advantage of using several techniques together is the additional
friend-making power such combined techniques provide. To illustrate,
consider how using the primacy eﬀect, Friendship Formula, and third-party
introduction helped our military forces make friends out of people that might
well be predisposed to be wary or downright hostile toward Americans.
Winning over the hearts and minds of civilians when you are a foreigner
conducting military operations in their country can be a daunting assignment.
Combat soldiers on foreign soil, by the very nature of their work, are forced to
adopt a strategy voiced by General James “Mad Dog” Mattis, who said, “Be
polite, be professional, but have a plan to kill everybody you meet.” In other
words, making friends out of potential enemies can be a trying task.
In an attempt to win over the Afghan people, I was a member of a team
that was asked to “show our guys [American forces] how to be less threatening
yet, at the same time, maintain their battleﬁeld awareness.”
So how do you go about making someone appear friendly when everything
they wear appears threatening (battle gear, helmets, gun belts) and they are
taught to scowl (their “game face”) when dealing with the local populace? It’s
no wonder that when these soldiers come into a local village the native
population takes one look, sees foe signals, and goes shields up.
is is what we told the military to do: Go into the villages with the same
battle gear and a readiness to defend yourself if attacked but also do the
following:
1. Employ the Friendship Formula: Spend some time in the village without really doing
anything . . . just be there. is satisﬁes the condition of proximity. en, over time, increase
the number (frequency) of visits to the village and the amount of time (duration) spent there.
Finally, add intensity to the mix by giving the children of the village things they like (more on
this in a moment).
2. Send out “friend” rather than “foe” signals: Keep your game face but put a mask over it; in other
words, smile, don’t scowl.
3. Once the villagers are used to seeing you acting in a nonthreatening way, load up a truck with
soccer balls and drive into the village where the children can see you. What will happen? Because
you’re sending out friend signals, the children won’t see you as a threat and, further, their
curiosity will be aroused (intensity) and they’ll approach the truck and ask, “Who are those
balls all for?” e driver of the truck can tell the children, “ey’re for you!” en give them
away.
So, what happens? e kids like you. So when they see their parents, the
kids serve as a third-party introduction on behalf of the Americans. ey say,
“I saw the Americans, they gave us soccer balls, and they are nice people.” So
now the parents see you through the primacy ﬁlter created by their children
and they are more open to seeing you as a friend rather than as “the enemy.”
If the Americans had simply come into the village without employing the
Friendship Formula (no attempt to establish proximity, frequency, duration,
and intensity), sending foe rather than friend signals and not using the primacy
eﬀect through third-party introductions, what do you think would have
happened when the American forces told the village elders they weren’t a
threat? e Americans simply wouldn’t have been believed. e soldiers would
have been perceived as liars.
It is amazing how easy it is to inﬂuence people’s behavior using these
friendship tools. Alone or in combination, they allow you to make people feel
better about themselves and, in turn, encourage them to make you feel better
as well. When you employ the Golden Rule of Friendship, it encourages
reciprocity: “If you make me happy, I want to make you happy.” Even in
onetime encounters, when you are interacting with a person you will probably
never see again, you can witness this reciprocity in action.
THE CHOICE BETWEEN FLYING FIRST CLASS OR BEING GROUNDE D FOR
BEING GRUMPY
Several years ago, I had a layover in Frankfurt, Germany. I wasn’t looking
forward to the rest of my ﬂight; I had the middle seat in coach and the
scheduled ﬂying time was eight hours. I certainly didn’t want to board early,
and with an hour to spare, I decided to put the time to good use. I pulled up
every German word I could remember from my high school language class and
walked over to the ticket agent. As I approached, I gave the major friend
signals, the eyebrow ﬂash, the smile, the head tilt. When I got to the counter, I
said “Guten tag . . .” so we would have some “common ground” (see Chapter
4). He smiled at my amateur attempt to speak the language but returned the
greeting, and then said in English, “Can I help you?”
I answered no but began to engage him in conversation. I used empathic
statements to encourage him to speak and to make him feel good about
himself. As the conversation progressed, spurred on by my brief empathic
comments, he was doing almost all of the talking. He didn’t notice this because
people see the world as revolving around them and thus my behavior did not
stray outside the human baseline and cause an “alert” reaction in his brain. I
gave him an excuse to talk; in fact, I encouraged it and it made him feel good.
So now he likes me.
At the end of our “conversation,” the agent asked me why I didn’t board the
plane. I told him that I had a middle seat and I wanted to spend as little time
as possible jammed in there. at was it.
About twenty minutes later, the ticket agent made a ﬁnal boarding call. As I
walked to the air bridge, I heard the agent call out, “Herr Schafer.” I stopped
and the agent walked over to me. He asked if I had my boarding pass. I
nodded and showed it to him. He took it and handed me a diﬀerent pass.
“Enjoy your ﬂight, Herr Schafer,” he said.
I looked at the document and recognized I had been upgraded to a seat in
business class. I said, “ank you, sir, I really appreciate that.”
“No problem, don’t worry about it,” he replied and waved me toward the
plane.
•  •  •
Another time my plane was late and people were really angry. I was waiting in
line at the boarding counter and the guy in front of me was so worked up he
was yelling at the agent about how he was going to miss his connecting ﬂight
and yada, yada, yada. She told him there was nothing she could do but put
him on the later ﬂight that left at 5:30 p .m.
en it was my turn. I walked up to the obviously ﬂustered employee and
didn’t expect anything; I was only trying to make the agent’s day better. She
took the ticket I handed her and said, “Sorry, sir, you’re going to miss your
connecting ﬂight. I can book you on a later plane leaving at ﬁve thirty p.m.”
I looked her directly in the eyes and said wryly, “I don’t think that’s
acceptable,” mimicking the previous passenger. And as she looked back at me I
added, “Can I yell at you now?” And she said no and mentioned the 5:30 p.m.
ﬂight again.
I repeated, “Can I yell at you now?” at’s when she started giggling. I said,
“When can I start yelling at you?” Both of us were now grinning and bantering
back and forth. After about a minute of this she said, “You know what . . . I
just found a seat on the two forty p.m. ﬂight,” and typed my name into the
computer. I commented, “I’m just curious, I overheard you tell the previous
customer that there were no seats available on the two forty p.m. ﬂight.”
“ere are no seats for people who yell at me. Do you want to yell at me now?”
she said. “No, ma’am,” I sheepishly replied. “ank you.”
e interesting thing is I didn’t walk up to the agent with the idea of getting
an earlier ﬂight; I just wanted to make her feel better. But when you make
other people feel good, good things often end up happening to you.
•  •  •
I’ve used this “get out your frustration” approach many times with all kinds of
customer service representatives and it never fails to assuage their anger and
put them in a better mood. During one of my foreign trips, a group of Chinese
passengers missed their connecting ﬂight to Hong Kong and they were giving
the gate agent a hard time. She was trying to be nice to them, to no avail.
Eventually, the police were called to deal with the situation because the
passengers were causing such a ruckus.
I had the dubious “honor” of being the next person in line to speak with
the ticket agent. So I walked up to the podium and said, “Looks like you had a
little trouble here today.” (empathic statement)
Her answer was short and curt, “Yeah.”
“Looks like you’re frustrated,” I observed. (empathic statement)
“Yeah, I’m very frustrated that I can’t yell at those people. I can’t get rid of
my frustration.”
I gave the agent a sympathetic nod of the head. “Ma’am, I’ll tell you what I
can do. I’m going to go back to the rope at the beginning of the line and then
I’m going to walk up to you again and say something about your service and I
want you to let me have it. G et it out of your system.”
e woman looked a bit leery but said, “Okay.”
So I went back to the roped area, turned around, and walked back up to the
counter. I pointed my ﬁnger at the agent and said, “I didn’t like the way you
treated those people. You were rude, inconsiderate and . . .” I got no further, as
the agent told me to shut up and then she let me have it. I mean, all that pent-
up frustration was boiling just below the surface and now she had a chance to
get it out!
After she ﬁnished her tirade, I told the woman I was extremely angry and
disappointed.
e agent caught her breath and asked, “What would assuage your anger,
sir? Would an upgrade help?”
I nodded aﬃrmatively. “Yes, I think that would help.”
“All right, I’ll give you an upgrade to ﬁrst class,” she declared.
I said, “ank you.” And then we both started laughing.
As my ﬂight was boarding the agent actually came on the plane and
thanked me for “making her day.”
is kind of thing happens to me all the time. People do things for me. I
don’t ask for favors, not even a hint. What I have discovered is when you make
other people feel good about themselves (the Golden Rule of Friendship) you
not only get people to like you, there’s also a collateral beneﬁt; they want to
make you feel good as well. I see it every day. I experience it time after time.
Here’s another air travel experience to illustrate this “beneﬁt.” I was in
Moline, Illinois, when my ﬂight was canceled. is is not exactly a great place
to get stranded. People were ranting and swearing. e woman directly in front
of me in line was waving her arms and screaming at the ticket agent, who was
trying her best not to lose it. She said, “e next ﬂight I can put you on,
ma’am, is tomorrow morning.” Upon hearing that information, the woman
swore even louder and stomped oﬀ.
It was my turn. I walked up to the still-simmering agent and said, “Wow,
that lady was pretty intense.” (empathic statement)
“She was,” she agreed. “I didn’t like her.”
I replied, “Well, I couldn’t help but overhear there isn’t a ﬂight until
tomorrow morning.”
And she said, “No, there’s another ﬂight in an hour.”
I started to say something, but she interrupted, “I don’t like her. She waits
until tomorrow. I like you. You get on today.”
UTILIZING FRIENDSHIP TOOLS: THE SKY’S THE LIMIT
I have one last ﬂying story that should, without a doubt, conﬁrm that the
friendship tools do indeed work. I was on the last ﬂight out of town, with a
ninety-minute layover, so I decided this would be a great opportunity to
interview some airline personnel and get their thoughts about the relationship
between customer service and customer be havior.
ere was a single employee still working the ticket counter. I headed her
way, using friendship signals as I approached. I needed a “hook” that would
pique her curiosity. When she asked me where I was going I said I was going to
Chicago to ﬁnish up an investigation. She asked what I did for a living and I
said, “I work for the FBI.” at got her attention and she asked what kind of
FBI work I did.
“I train people,” I replied.
“Train people in what?” she asked.
“To be nice to people . . . to  get things they don’t deserve.” (curiosity hook)
She laughed. “Like what?”
“Like an upgrade.”
We were both grinning at this point. I said: “If I walked up to you and
asked for an upgrade, would you do it?”
“No,” she exclaimed. “People do that all the time and I say no.”
“So do you ever give upgrades?”
“Yeah, to people I like.”
Case closed.
Whether you’re in Afghanistan or Atlanta, the techniques in this book
work, alone or in combination. When you use them, you maximize your
chances for making friends, even with those individuals who start out seeing
you as an enemy. And, who knows, you just might get an upgrade in the
process.
4
THE LAWS OF ATTRACTION
If you go looking for a friend, you’re going to ﬁnd they’re very scarce. If you go out to be a
friend, you’ll ﬁnd them everywhere.
—ZIG ZIGLAR
In this chapter I will give you some additional tools for your friendship
toolbox: the “Laws of Attraction.” ese “laws” describe certain factors that,
when present, serve to heighten the probability that two individuals will be
drawn to each other and experience a positive outcome when they interact.
Because these laws play a critica l role in shaping human relationships, if you
can incorporate them into your own relationship interactions they will provide
additional ways for you to make friends with the people you meet.
ink of each Law of Attraction as a tool to enhance your relationship
eﬀectiveness. You don’t have to use them all to achieve your friendship
objectives; in fact, you shouldn’t, because some of the laws are not congruent
with your personal characteristics or are designed to work with long- versus
short-term relationships (a onetime encounter with a sales clerk as opposed to
the development of a lasting friendship). Pick the ones that suit you the best
and go with those when interacting with persons of interest.
THE LAW OF SIMILARITY (“COMMON GROUND” )
People who share the same perspectives, attitudes, and activities tend to
develop close relationships. e adage “Birds of a feather ﬂock together” has
merit. People are attracted to other people who share their interests. e need
to avoid cognitive dissonance may explain why this is true. Dissonance occurs
when people hold two opposing ideas or beliefs. is real or perceived
diﬀerence creates anxiety.
People holding similar views reinforce one another and thereby enhance the
likelihood of mutual attraction. Similarity also increases the probability that
like-minded individuals will meet again. Mutual reinforcement maintains or
elevates self-esteem, which leads to a greater sense of well-being and happiness.
People who share the same principles and beliefs rarely experience
dissonance and feel secure in the sameness they share with each other. ese
individuals tend to experience less conﬂict because they perceive the world in
similar ways. Sameness leads to the perception of greater happiness and a
feeling of being understood. When people ﬁrst meet, even the perception of
sameness will increase mutual attraction.
CUT FROM THE SAME CLOTH
Early in my career, I noticed that most FBI agents looked alike and shared the
same views. is can be explained by the psychological principle of similarity
and attraction. FBI agents sitting on hiring boards tended to hire new agents
who were most like themselves. When the newly hired agents gained enough
seniority to participate in the hiring process, they also unconsciously selected
individuals who were most like them. Over the decades, the FBI became
populated by agents who shared the same views, dressed alike, and looked
alike.
With the advent of aﬃrmative action, more women and minorities were
included in the FBI ranks. When these individuals gained seniority and sat on
hiring boards, they tended to select applicants who were most like themselves.
Based on the psychological principle of similarity and attraction, current FBI
agents as well as most U.S. businesses more closely reﬂect the diversity of the
American population today.
Commonalities connect people. Finding common ground quickly
establishes rapport and a fertile environment for developing friendships.
Aristotle wrote, “We like those who resemble us, and are engaged in the same
pursuits. . . . We like those who desire the same things as we [do].” Developing
relationships is easy if you can ﬁnd common ground with another person.
People automatically think that other people think like they do, especially
when meeting an individual for the ﬁrst time. us when you ﬁrst meet
another individual, you can build on this predisposition by seeking things you
have in common.
When assessing someone from a distance, look for potential commonalities.
ese can be found, for example, in the way people dress. An individual
wearing a shirt embossed with a sports team logo suggests that he or she has at
least a passing interest in the team. Even if you don’t favor the same team, you
can use the information to start a conversation, particularly if you have any
interest in sports.
What a person is doing can also serve as a basis for establishing common
ground. If a person is walking a dog, reading a book, or pushing a baby
carriage it provides you with valuable information for identifying potential
conversation openers and/or similar interests.
Tattoos can also provide clues to people’s interests. Tattoos are permanent.
Most of the time when people get one, they put some thought into the type of
tattoo they want and where it should be placed on their bodies. A small tattoo
of a marijuana leaf placed on a prominent part of a person’s body projects a
strongly held attitude. If you are strongly opposed to the use of weed, it might
be best to look elsewhere for a friend who shares more compatible beliefs.
e way a person interacts with others can also provide clues to their
personal disposition. A person who slumps in a chair and does not easily
interact with others has a diﬀerent disposition than someone who sits upright
and easily engages those around them. If your personality diﬀers signiﬁcantly
from the person across from you, the probability of developing a close
relationship signiﬁcantly diminishes.
After you make initial contact with a person, listening to what they say can
provide you with additional clues to their likes and dislikes. Make a conscious
eﬀort to direct the conversation toward the things you have in common.
Talking about shared experiences, interests, hobbies, jobs, or any number of
other common topics enhances rapport and the development of friendships.
Here are a few illustrations of how quickly you can ﬁnd common ground with
other individuals.
CONTEMPORANEOUS EXPERIENCE
A contemporaneous experience means that you and the person you just met
share the same interests or attitudes. For example, if you spot someone wearing
a shirt with a Chicago White Sox logo and you are a White Sox fan, then you
share a contemporaneous interest in that team. However, just because someone
is wearing a White Sox shirt does not automatically mean he or she is a White
Sox fan. In addition to building rapport, empathic statements can be used to
explore observations or hypotheses you may develop regarding the person you
just met. Consider the following conversation:
BRYAN: Hi, my name is Bryan. What’s yours?
CHRISTINE: Christine.
BRYAN: So you must be a White sox fan. (empathic statement)
CHRISTINE: I’ve been a Sox fan all of my life.
BRYAN: Me too.
By using an empathic statement, Bryan learned that both he and Christine
were passionate about the White Sox. Once common ground has been
established, Bryan can now focus on that topic and the conversation will ﬂow
naturally. If Brian is not a Sox fan, he could retreat to their shared general
interest in baseball, as in this exchange:
BRYAN: Hi, my name is Bryan. What’s yours?
CHRISTINE: Christine.
BRYAN: So you must be a White Sox fan. (empathic statement)
CHRISTINE: I’ve been a Sox fan all my life.
BRYAN: I like baseball, but I’m a Cubs fan.
CHRISTINE: Oh, I don’t follow minor-league baseball.
(Note: It’s obvious that Christine, besides having a sense of humor, has
disdain for her favorite team’s crosstown rival!) Once it has been established
that Christine and Bryan share an interest in baseball but root for diﬀerent
teams, Bryan could use that information to spark a lively conversation on the
pros and cons of each ball club.
People who share the same hometowns can quickly build friendships,
especially when they meet outside those geographical boundaries. Shared job
interests, political positions, religious beliefs, mutual friends, and similar
experiences are good topics to explore for common ground.
If you are having a diﬃcult time ﬁnding contemporaneous common
ground, talk about music. As mentioned earlier, the one thing that most
people have in common with each other is music. Music is a neutral topic that
most people are willing to talk about, even if their listening tastes diﬀer.
TEMPORAL EXPERIENCES
Experiences shared across time, such as attendance at the same school, military
service, or living in the same area, enhance opportunities for making friends.
You may not have shared the experiences at the same time, but you can reach
across time to seek common ground.
VICARIOUS EXPERIENCES
A vicarious experience occurs when you live out a lifestyle or activity through
the revelations of another person. You can use vicarious experiences to establish
common ground with another person even when, in reality, you know very
little about the subject matter being discussed. is approach is particularly
eﬀective because it allows your person of interest to talk about themselves and
something they most likely are interested in. is makes them feel good about
themselves, and because you are the one providing the impetus for that feeling,
you are seen in a positive light (the Golden Rule of Friendship in action). is
is a favorite technique for salespeople to use because they can ﬁnd common
ground with a customer even when they don’t know much about what the
customer is talking about. Here is an example:
CAR SALESPERSON: What do you do for a living?
CUSTOMER: I’m a baker.
CAR SALESPERSON: Really? My father was a baker.
e car salesperson doesn’t have to know anything about being a baker
because his father was a baker. You can use the same technique to seek
common ground when you meet someone for the ﬁrst time.
AUDREY: Where do you work?
SUSAN: I’m a ﬁnancial planner.
AUDREY: Interesting. My sister is an accountant.
Most of us have family members or extended family members who are
employed in the same or similar occupations as the people we speak with. In
Audrey’s case, her sister is an accountant, which is a similar ﬁeld to ﬁnancial
planning. If you don’t have a family member or relative working in the same or
similar ﬁeld as your person of interest, think of a friend who is. Using the
technique of vicarious experiences can pay dividends whenever you are trying
to establish a relationship. Exercise caution, however: Do not lie to the person
you are meeting for the ﬁrst time. If your relationship blossoms, then the truth
may be revealed. Broken trust, especially occurring at the beginning of a
relationship, can quickly turn oﬀ the Like Switch.
THE LAW OF MISATTRIBUTION
Sometimes making friends is simply a matter of being in the right place at the
right time. When people feel good about themselves and do not attribute the
good feeling to a speciﬁc cause, they tend to associate the cause of that good
feeling with the person who is physically close to them at the time. If you
happen to be that person, you’re going to beneﬁt and be liked not for anything
you did but because of the “misattribution.” In a sense, what we have here is a
case of collateral beneﬁt rather than collateral damage.
Consider this example. When people exercise, their brains release
endorphins. e release of endorphins gives these individuals a nonspeciﬁc
sense of well-being. Since the eﬀect of the endorphins is not directly attributed
to exercise, the good feeling tends to be linked to another person, if one
happens to be nearby. ink of it as the “collateral beneﬁt.” Since that good
feeling is “misattributed” to the nearby person, he or she is subconsciously seen
as the cause of the good feeling and, therefore, appears more attractive.
How can you use this information to get someone to like you? Actually, you
can take advantage of this phenomenon in a number of ways. If you are in
shape, you can arrange a meeting around an exercise activity, join a ﬁtness
club, or participate in sports (organized walks or runs—“fun” or otherwise—
provide a great opportunity for misattribution to work).
USING MISATTRIBUTION TO GET A DATE: “EXERCISE” YOUR OPTIONS
Let’s assume you want to ask a person of interest on a date and want to
increase your chances of getting a positive response. Using the Law of
Misattribution might do the trick. If you discover that the person you want to
meet jogs or exercises regularly, arrange for a “chance meeting” during or
shortly after he or she completes their exercise regimen. e encounter does
not have to include a verbal exchange. Simply sharing the same space can
induce misattribution and will make you appear more attractive. If both you
and your person of interest work out, try to arrange your workout time to
coincide with theirs. Being nearby during the exercise will produce the
collateral beneﬁts already discussed. If the person you want to meet is a
coworker who exercises, be in the vicinity of their oﬃce or cubicle when they
return from their physical activit y. Likewise, if you know the person you are
interested in goes to a coﬀee shop every day after his or her exercise routine,
make sure you are present at the shop at the time they arrive.
What you are trying to do is take advantage of the misattribution principle
and increase your attractiveness in the eyes of the other person by being
associated with the good feelings that come about through the release of
exercise-related endorphins. To accomplish this objective, you need to be in
close physical proximity to the person during or soon after the endorphins are
released.
Surprisingly, misattribution also occurs when people experience frightening
events or traumatic experiences. People feel closer relationships with others
with whom they share the same frightening or traumatic experiences. Soldiers
who survive harrowing battles form deep bonds with their comrades in arms.
Police oﬃcers develop close relationships with their partners after they share
traumatic experiences. In the days when it was allowed (or tolerated), “hazing”
of sorority and fraternity pledges brought those who survived the ordeal closer
together and often created lasting friendships.
A scary movie can evoke the same response. If you go with someone to a
scary movie, the shared frightful experience triggers misattribution, which in
turn increases attraction between the moviegoers. For that reason, arranging to
see a scary movie is ideal for a ﬁrst date because it increases the chance for
mutual attraction in a new relationship. Likewise, if your long-term
relationship with someone is waning, go skydiving or bungee jumping, ride a
roller coaster, or pursue other activities that create the perception of danger.
e shared experience will bring you closer together and reinvigorate your
friendship or romance.
THE LAW OF CURIOSITY
Curiosity can be used as a “hook” to increase intensity (Friendship Formula)
and pique a person’s interest in you. It is an eﬀective way to make friends. All
creatures capable of more than a mere mechanical response to stimuli are
curious. It is a biological imperative, driven by the need for self-preservation,
reproduction, and greed. Humans want to know everything: who we are, who
others are, where we came from and when, what’s on the other side of the hill,
and the shape, size, composition, longevity, and distance of everything from
quarks to the universe.
In order to survive, animals above the primitive level must understand the
niche in which they live. In addition, they must discover any changes in that
niche to be able to respond to them appropriately and eﬀectively. Since it is
personal survival that the individual is concerned about, the changes in the
immediate vicinity—those that will aﬀect him or her personally—are the most
important.
e most eﬀective way to discover changes is to go looking for them. us,
a noise in the bushes draws the cat’s attention, followed by a slow, stealthy stalk
(no sense charging into trouble). e noise might be prey, it might be a
predator, or it could be the automatic sprinkler coming on. is curiosity can
lead to a meal, a timely escape, or an inadvertent bath. In any case, it must be
investigated.
When you behave in a manner that produces curiosity in another person, it
signiﬁcantly increases the chances that individual will want to interact with
you in an attempt to satisfy their curiosity. us, a “curiosity hook” becomes
an eﬀective tool to meet a person of interest and develop a friendship. I used
the Law of Curiosity regularly as an FBI agent to enhance my recruiting
eﬀectiveness of foreign nationals. At one point during my FBI career, a North
Korean moved into my jurisdiction. ere was reason to suspect he was an
agent for his government and I was given the assignment to try to get the guy
to become a double agent. I knew if I simply walked into the photo shop
where he worked and said, “I’m Jack Schafer with the FBI, can we talk?” the
guy would have probably panicked and bolted from the store. So I decided to
use a curiosity hook to try to reel him in.
First, I went into his store when I knew he wasn’t there and left him a note
saying, “Sorry I missed you,” and signed it, “Jack Schafer.” I did this on three
separate occasions. On the third visit, I added my phone number to the note I
left behind. All these messages were designed to pique the North Korean’s
curiosity. Who is this Jack Schafer and why does he want to contact me? is
was what I wanted the North Korean to be wondering, hoping that each new
note would further arouse his curiosity. It worked. After receiving the note
with my phone number, he called me and I was able to arrange a meeting with
him later in the week.
THE LAW OF RECIPROCITY
Social norms dictate that if someone gives you something or performs a favor
for you, large or small, then you are predisposed to return the gesture in like
kind or in greater measure. Organizations take advantage of this law by
mailing people return address labels, calendars, or other small trinkets along
with a request for a donation. People are more likely to comply because they
received something ﬁrst and feel obligated to reciprocate in kind.
e Law of Reciprocity is a very eﬀective tool for making friends. When
you smile at someone, that person feels obligated to return the smile. A smile
signals acceptance and liking. People like to be liked. e principle of
reciprocity is triggered when people become aware that someone else likes
them. Once a person discovers that another person likes them, they ﬁnd that
person more attractive. People tend to reciprocate the same feelings others
extend to them. Reciprocity produces the most dramatic results when both
parties to the inter action form good ﬁrst impressions of or have natural feelings
toward the other person.
Not “You’re Welcome,” But . . .
e next time someone thanks you for something, don’t say, “You’re welcome.”
Instead, say, “I know you’d do the same thing for me.” is response invokes
reciprocity. e other person is now predisposed to help you when you ask
them for a favor.
THE LAW OF SELF-DISCLOSURE
Reciprocity is also linked with openness in communication. Individuals who
disclose more personal information with other people are more likely to receive
a similar level of personal information in return. is phenomenon is further
enhanced if the people who are communicating have shared interests.
Self-disclosure promotes attraction. People feel a sense of closeness to others
who reveal their vulnerabilities, innermost thoughts, and facts about
themselves. e sense of closeness increases if the disclosures are emotional
rather than factual. is is partly due to the intensity of such disclosures,
which positively aﬀects the likability of the person making them.
Disclosures that are too general reduce the sense of openness, thus reducing
the feeling of closeness and likability. Disclosures that are too intimate often
highlight character and personality ﬂaws of the person, thus decreasing
likability. People who make intimate disclosures too early in a relationship are
often perceived as insecure, which further decreases likability. us, if you are
meeting someone who you would like to have as a long-term friend or
signiﬁcant other, you should be careful about making your most intimate
disclosures in the early stages of the relationship.
Self-disclosure is a two-step process. First, a person has to make a self-
disclosure that is neither too general nor too intimate. Second, the self-
disclosure must be received with empathy, caring, and respect. A negative
response made to a genuine self-disclosure can instantly terminate a
relationship.
Self-disclosures are often reciprocal. When one person makes self-
disclosures, the listener is more likely to reciprocate by making similar ones.
e exchange of personal information creates a sense of intimacy in
relationships. A relationship in which one person makes personal self-
disclosures while the other person continues to make superﬁcial disclosures is
not progressing and is likely to end.
WANT TO INCREASE THE LONGEVITY OF YOUR RELATIONSHIP?
Use the Hansel and Gretel approach. Hansel and Gretel, in the classic fairy
tale, set oﬀ into the woods, and to ensure that they can ﬁnd their way back,
they leave a trail of bread crumbs along the way. I recommend you use the
“bread crumb” approach to distributing information about yourself.
Relationships tend to wane over time. To increase the longevity of these
liaisons, release self-disclosures over an extended period of time.
Once somebody ﬁnds a person whom they can trust, they are often
tempted to open the emotional ﬂoodgates—telling too much too quickly—
overwhelming their partner in the process. Disclosures should be made over a
long period of time to ensure that the relationship slowly increases in intensity
and closeness. A steady trickle of information, like Hansel and Gretel’s bread
crumbs dropped one piece at a time, increases the longevity of the relationship
because each partner continually feels the closeness that comes with a steady
stream of self-disclosures.
Mutual self-disclosures create trust. People who make personal disclosures
become vulnerable to the person to whom the disclosures are made. Mutual
self-disclosures create a safety zone because each person has exposed their
vulnerabilities and tends to protect all the disclosures to avoid mutual
embarrassment resulting from a breach of trust.
Social network users tend to rely more on self-disclosures to create a sense
of closeness because they do not receive verbal and nonverbal cues that would
be otherwise exchanged in face-to-face communications. e veracity of
information exchanged online is suspect, thus forcing individuals online to
spend more time verifying information about each other. Once veracity has
been established, the lack of a physical presence increases the probability of
more intimate disclosures online, which in turn leads to the illusion of a closer
relationship.
THE LAW OF PERSONAL ATTRACTIVENESS
Attractiveness is a tangible beneﬁt for those who possess it. Even though it is
said that “beauty is in the eye of the beholder,” the reality is that every culture
has widely accepted standards of what is “attractive.” Although these standards
might change over time, most members of the culture internalize the
prevailing, current norm of what is considered beautiful or handsome.
Attractiveness is not “absolute.” You can become more attractive if you are
willing to put some eﬀort into achieving such a goal. According to Gordon
Wainwright, author of Teach Yourself Body Language, anyone can increase their
attractiveness to others if they maintain good eye contact, act upbeat, dress
well, add a dash of color to their wardrobe, and listen well. Wainwright also
stresses the importance of posture and bearing and suggests that for one week
you stand straight, tuck in your stomach, hold your head high, and smile at
those you meet. From the results of many experiments, Wainwright predicts
you will begin to be treated with more warmth and respect and start  attracting
more people to you.
Attractive people are seen as having more positive attributes. Good-looking
men and women are generally judged to be more talented, kind, honest, and
intelligent than their less attractive counter parts. Controlled studies show that
people go out of their way to help attractive people, of the same or opposite
sex, because they want to be liked and accepted by good-looking people.
Attractiveness can have ﬁnancial implications. On a scale of less attractive to
more attractive, less attractive people earn 5 to 10 percent less than individuals
of average looks, who in turn earned 3 to 8 percent less than those deemed
good-looking. Studies also show attractive students get more attention and
higher evaluations from their teachers. Good-looking patients get more
personalized care from their doctors, and attractive criminals receive lighter
sentences than less attractive lawbreakers. One need look no further than
Hollywood to see the impact beautiful movie stars have on our system of
justice.
THE LAW OF HUMOR
Individuals who use humor in social encounters are perceived as more likable.
In addition, both trust and attraction increase when a lighthearted approach is
used during person-to-person interactions. Judicious use of humor can reduce
anxiety and establish a relaxed mood that helps a relationship to develop more
rapidly. A slightly risqué joke can help to escalate the level of intimacy in a
ﬂirtatious conversation. Of course, as is the case with any verbal
communication, the speaker must be sure that the words, or, in this case, the
humor used, is appropriate and will not be perceived as oﬀensive by the
listener.
e added beneﬁt to using humor is that laughing causes a release of
endorphins, which makes you feel good about yourself, and, according to the
Golden Rule of Friendship, if you make people feel good about themselves,
they will like you. A woman who likes a particular man will laugh at his jokes,
no matter how lame, more often and with more gusto than she will laugh at
jokes told by a man in whom she has little romantic interest. is
phenomenon further supports the Golden Rule of Friendship.
THE LAW OF FAMILIARITY
e more we meet and interact with people, the more likely we are to become
friends. Behavioral scientist Leon Festinger and two colleagues studied
relationships in a small two-story apartment building. ey found that
neighbors were most likely to be friends. e residents who were least likely to
be friends were on separate ﬂoors. ose residents near ground-ﬂoor staircases
and mailboxes had friends on both ﬂoors.
e Law of Familiarity points to the importance of proximity
(a component of the Friendship Formula) in aﬀecting relationships. People
who share the same physical space are more likely to be attracted to one
another. Proximity predisposes one person to like another person, even before
they are formally introduced. Classroom seating charts can be good predictors
of which students will become attracted to one another. In my class, I’ve
observed that students who sit in the vicinity of each other are more likely to
become friends as opposed to students who sit on opposite sides of the
classroom. Likewise, in professional settings, romances and friendships can be
predicted based on who sits next to whom.
e old adage “Absence makes the heart grow fonder” is not necessarily
true. e farther apart an engaged couple live from one another, the greater the
probability their engagement will not survive.
THE LAW OF ASSOCIATION
When people associate in large groups, people on the outside of the group tend
to assess individual members of the group based on their overall impression of
the total group. So, when a less attractive individual wants to be seen as more
attractive, he or she should associate with a group of attractive people.
Conversely, an attractive person may be viewed as less attractive if he or she is
in the company of unattractive people.
It seems that adult life doesn’t change all that much from high school. If
you want to be “popular,” you still need to hang out with the popular people.
In a business situation this means always try to “friend up,” not down. Who
you associate with matters. If you want to be seen as successful, you need to
hang out with successful people.
e Law of Association works diﬀerently when, instead of looking at how
one person’s attractiveness is aﬀected by being in a large group, the focus is on
how people are compared and perceived when they are with just one or two
others. In these circumstances, if a person wants to appear as more attractive,
he or she should be seen in the company of a less attractive individual. is
phenomenon helps explain the behavior of prospective buyers when they visit
model homes. ey leave their own homes, which are satisfactory in the
morning. After spending all day looking at model homes, they return to what
they now perceive as an unattractive home. eir house becomes less attractive
because they compare it with the more elegant models they recently viewed.
THE LAW OF SELF-ESTEEM
People like to associate with individuals who display high levels of self-esteem.
us, such individuals have an easier time attracting others and making
friends. Individuals with high levels of self-esteem are also self-conﬁdent and
comfortable with being the center of attention. ey are also comfortable with
self-disclosure, which is a building block in creating close personal
relationships.
To people with high self-esteem, rejection is part of life, not a reﬂection on
their self-worth. Conversely, people with low self-esteem are reluctant to
disclose personal information. eir inability to make self-disclosures serves as
a defense mechanism to guard against criticism and rejection. Self-disclosure is
the path to closer personal relationships; unfortunately, for a person with low
self-esteem it is the “path less traveled.” Ironically, it is the fear of self-disclosure
that can lead to the rejection a person with low self-esteem is trying to avoid.
A ﬁne line exists between self-esteem and arrogance. Arrogant people often
feel superior and set themselves apart from others. For this reason, they are
perceived as being “diﬀerent.” As a result, the probability of mutual attraction
is signiﬁcantly reduced, except with other arrogant individuals who share their
attitudes and behavior.
In American society, men and women often deﬁne self-worth in diﬀerent
ways. In the most general terms men derive a sense of self-esteem and social
status from their ability or potential ability to earn money, impress women,
and own high-priced objects like nice cars and real estate. Conversely, though
the American marketplace is experiencing a remarkable shift with more women
graduating from college than men, it is still true that many women gain a sense
of self-esteem and social status through displays of physical beauty,
youthfulness, and relationships with others. ese diﬀerences are evident when
game show hosts ask contestants to brieﬂy describe themselves. Male
contestants usually describe themselves by their occupations (“I am an
electricia n”), whereas, women characterize themselves by their relationships (“I
am a wife and mother of three children”). As more women work outside the
home, they, too, may begin to identify with their professions instead of their
relationships.
When it comes to establishing short- or long-term romantic relationships,
high-status women (young and physically attractive) tend to couple with high-
status men (high earning potential and disposable income). is pattern of
mate selection parallels typical mating strategies. Men select young and
physically attractive women to ensure procreation and women select high
earners with disposable incomes to achieve the security necessary to raise
children. Men with lower self-esteem tend to select women who are less
physically attractive and women with lower self-esteem tend to select mates
who are lower income earners and with less disposable income.
Sometimes lower-status individuals will try to “fake” higher status in an
attempt to establish relationships with people “out of their league.” For
example, a man might pretend to be a high-income earner by lavishing a
woman with expensive gifts, driving a car he cannot aﬀord, and spending
money he does not have. is strategy, although eﬀective in the short run,
usually ends catastrophically as time passes and the suitor, unable to aﬀord his
ruse, is unmasked and his true worth revealed.
DON’T BANK ON IT
One of my students told me of a common ruse that he and his friends often
employ on nights out. On the way to a bar, they will stop by a large bank’s
ATM and pick through dropped receipts until they ﬁnd ones that have
especially large balances printed on them. ese they pocket for later. en, if
the student or one of his friends meets a girl who is above his ﬁnancial
standing, he will casually write his phone number on the back of the purloined
receipt—creating the illusion that he is a wealthy man.
THE LAW OF AVAILABILITY (SCARCITY)
People are attracted to individuals and things they cannot readily obtain. In the
case with things, people are more attracted to a coveted object because it is out
of their reach. When the object of desire is ﬁnally gained, the attraction for the
object rapidly diminishes. Christmas presents provide a good example of this
phenomenon. Toys children wanted all year long are discarded several days
after they are retrieved from gift boxes under the tree. e Law of Availability
also holds true for human interaction, particularly in the early stages of a
developing relationship. e dating rule your mom swore by has scientiﬁc
merit. An individual should not always make him or herself readily available to
the person they are targeting for a longer-term relationship. A certain level of
unavailability will make you more of a mystery and a challenge.
Remember Vladimir, the spy discussed in the Introduction? As you may
recall, after days of reading the newspaper and sitting silently with Vladimir, he
asked me why I kept coming back day after day. I folded the newspaper over,
looked at him, and said, “Because I want to talk to you.” en I immediately
returned the newspaper to the upright position and continued reading,
ignoring him. is action further increased Vladimir’s curiosity and created
scarcity. Finally, Vladimir made up his mind to talk to me and I ignored him,
increasing Vladimir’s drive to talk to me.
INCREASED RESTRAINT INCREASES DRIVE
Parents are fully aware of this law! If you tell your children not to do
something, they want to do it all the more. My own daughter went through a
teenage phase of testing her mom and me. She once brought home a young
man to meet us. He had four-inch-high gelled prongs that stood atop his head,
tattoos covering most of his exposed skin, and a motorcycle in our driveway. I
cordially greeted him without saying what I really felt about him or how
disappointed I was with my daughter’s choice of companion.
e next day, my daughter asked me what I thought of the young man. I
wanted to command her never to see him again, but I knew that if I increased
restraint, she would be that much more motivated to continue to date him.
Instead, I chose the following strategy. I told my daughter that her mother and
I raised her to make good judgments and that we trusted her decisions. If she
felt the young man was a good person to have in her life, we would support
her decision.
I never saw him again.
Fast-forward ten years. My daughter is now twenty-six years old. We sat in
the kitchen reminiscing about her teen years. To my surprise, she brought up
the young man. She admitted that she brought him home to make her mom
and me mad for some now forgotten transgression we committed. She further
admitted that when I told her that I trusted her judgment and knew she would
make the right decision, her conscience panged. She knew he was wrong for
her and that she was wrong to bring him home to spite us. She commented
that it was ironic that she intended to make us mad but, in the end, she was
the one who felt guilty. It took ten years to know if my strategy worked or not.
I was relieved to know that it did.
THE LAW OF THE ROCKY ROAD
When two people meet and do not immediately like one another, especially in
a romantic context, and then bond at a later time, they form a closer
relationship than if they had hit it oﬀ immediately. is phenomenon is
frequently highlighted in “romcom” (romantic comedy) movies. In the usual
scenario, a man meets a woman. e man does not like the woman and the
woman doesn’t like the man. Before the ﬁlm ends, they become romantically
involved. A romantic rocky road often leads to a more intense romantic
relationship.
A NEW STRATEGY TO BUTTERING UP THE BOSS: BUTTERING DOW N THE
BOSS
I recall a time when I was assigned to a new supervisor. Instead of welcoming
her with open arms, as did the rest of my squad mates, I purposefully remained
distant and displayed neutral to slightly negative body language. Gradually,
with each conversation we had, I began to display more positive nonverbal
cues. I completed the turnaround several months later by telling her I thought
she was a good supervisor and respected her strong managerial skills. From that
day forward, we formed a closer relationship than if I had immediately
accepted her. is closer relationship provided me with a distinct advantage
when I asked for scarce investigative resources, time oﬀ, and other favors.
THE LAW OF PERSONALITY
ere are literally hundreds of personality “types” or “characteristics” that have
been identiﬁed in scientiﬁc and popular literature. ey refer to consistent
behavioral patterns exhibited by an individual in his or her everyday behavior.
When somebody says, “that individual just isn’t my type,” they might be
commenting on the person’s physical appearance or strongly held beliefs (for
example, religious or political). However, in many cases they are referring to
the individual’s personality, which is incongruent with their own.
Two pervasive personality types, extroversion and introversion, are of
particular interest when it comes to personal interaction and the development
of both short- and long-term relationships.
Extroverts, as compared to introverts, appear more attractive because they
are seen as gregarious and self-conﬁdent. Prior to entering into any type of
relationship, knowing whether the person you want to meet tends toward
extroversion or introversion is useful information as it will give you an idea of
what types of behavior you can expect to encounter.
If you are an extrovert and the person you want to meet is an intro vert,
expect to see some inherent diﬀerences in the way each of you perceives the
world. Extroverts get their energy from being with other people and seek
stimulation from their environments. Extroverts often speak spontaneously
without thinking. ey do not hesitate to use a trial-and-error method to
arrive at a decision. Conversely, introverts expend energy when they engage
socially and seek alone time to recharge their batteries. Introverts seek
stimulation from within and seldom speak without thinking. ey also
carefully weigh options before making decisions.
Extroverts maintain a wide variety of relationships; however, those
relationships tend to be relatively shallow. Introverts, on the other hand, have
few relationships, but they are characterized by greater depth. Introverts who
date extroverts typically seek a closer relationship to which extroverts are less
willing to commit. is inability to reach a mutually satisfying level of
commitment highlights dissimilarity, which ultimately reduces mutual
attraction.
Extroverts use stream of consciousness to communicate. What they think,
they say. is spontaneity often gets extroverts into trouble, particularly with
introverts who think before they speak and are more easily embarrassed by
what they consider to be personal information when it is blurted out by an
extroverted companion. If you are an introvert who is thinking of becoming
involved with an extrovert, be prepared for the unexpected when it comes to
the words that come tumbling out of their mouth.
Generally, introverts and extroverts behave diﬀerently in social situations.
Extroverts tend to be more outgoing when they don’t know many people.
Introverts, on the other hand, tend to feel uncomfortable in large groups of
unfamiliar people. However, when introverts are in the company of friends or
are comfortable with their surroundings, they can become as outgoing as
extroverts (for a while, at least).
One method to determine if a person is an extrovert is to begin a sentence
and deliberately pause for a few seconds. Extroverts will generally complete the
sentence for you. Introverts will not. e same method can be used to
determine if you have established rapport with an introvert. When introverts
are comfortable with the people they are with, they will often complete
sentences in the same manner in which extroverts do. e diﬀerence in the use
of this method is that you can identify extroverts even if you don’t know that
the person you are speaking with is an introvert or an extrovert. To test rapport
with an introvert, you must ﬁrst determine that the person you are talking
with is an introvert.
I recall a case I spent months investigating. Suﬃcient personal and
biographical information was painstakingly gathered to determine what type of
personality the suspect possessed. Based on that information, I custom-
designed an investigative strategy to dovetail with the suspect’s personality. e
key to the success of the operation was our secretary. Her assignment was to
make a telephone call to the suspect that would initiate the operation. I
rehearsed with the secretary until she was comfortable with her role. She made
the telephone call but the suspect did not immediately take the bait. I
encouraged her to engage the suspect in casual conversation to reassure him.
e conversation became very casual and the suspect relaxed, and
unfortunately so did the secretary. e suspect asked the secretary where she
worked. She blurted out, “I work for the FBI.” us ended the undercover
operation. In true extroverted fashion, the secretary spoke without thinking.
PERSONALITY AND PURCHASES
If you are a salesperson, you might want to consider if your customer is an
extrovert or an introvert before making your pitch. Be sure to allow your
introverted customers time to think about your sales proposal. Introverts take
in information, mull it over, and then come to a decision. Pressing introverts
to reach a quick decision may force them to say no because they are not
comfortable making immediate decisions. Conversely, extroverts can be
pressured to some degree to buy your product “right now” because they are
more comfortable making impulsive decisions.
Rarely do people exhibit entirely extroverted or introverted characteristics.
Personality traits fall somewhere along a continuum. Some people actually
exhibit almost equal extroverted and introverted characteristics; however, most
people do have a preference for one or the other, and behave accordingly.
Introverts can act like extroverts when required to do so. If, for example, an
introvert has a job that requires them to be outgoing and gregarious, they can
do it, although it is more taxing to behave in such a manner than it would be if
they were natural extroverts. Moreover, when they are oﬀ the job, they return
to being introverts. ese contrasting lifestyles rarely conﬂict because a person’s
working world and private world normally don’t overlap.
e same can’t be said when it comes to personal relationships. If introverts
act like extroverts when they ﬁrst meet someone, the person they are seeing
often receives a shock if the relationship continues and the introvert reverts to
their “normal” behavior. Revealing your true personality when ﬁrst meeting
someone is far better than engaging in a Dr. Jekyll and Mr. Hyde approach
when you want to develop healthy, strong relationships.
THE LAW OF COMPLEMENTARITY (GIVING COMPLIMENTS)
People like to be complimented. It makes them feel good about themselves
and, according to the Golden Rule of Friendship, they are going to feel good
about you. e result: a better chance to make a friend or strengthen an
existing friendship.
Compliments, to be eﬀective, should be sincere and deserved. Paying
someone a compliment when you don’t really believe what you’re saying or
when the recipient of the compliment hasn’t earned the accolade is
counterproductive to good relationship building and is lying (the antithesis of
trust).
As author Steve Goodier notes: “Sincere compliments cost nothing and can
accomplish so much. In ANY relationship, they are the applause that
refreshes.” Use compliments when you get the opportunity; they work and are
an eﬀective tool in your friendship toolbox.
5
SPEAKING THE LANGUA GE OF FRIENDSHIP
Ultimately the bond of all companionship, whether in marriage or friendship, is
conversation.
—OSCAR WILDE
In Chapter 2, you learned that you can use nonverbal communication to make
friends. In a sense, these “friend signals” act like snowplows, clearing the way
for you to approach your person of interest and make a positive ﬁrst
impression along the way. Used alone, however, these smiles and head tilts are
insuﬃcient to sustain a relationship. For that, verbal communication is
required and, in fact, the words you say, and those said to you, will not only
play a large role in making friends, they will also impact the length and
strength of the friendships you acquire.
If there is only one thing you remember about how to make friends
through verbal communication, let it be this: e more you can encourage the
other person to speak, the more you listen to what they say, display empathy, and
respond positively when reacting to their comments, the greater the likelihood that
person will feel good about themselves (Golden Rule of Friendship) and like you as
a result. is means that when I (“ME”) desire YOU as a friend, I want to let
you know I am interested in what you have to say, and, in addition, give you
plenty of time to say it.
GREAT INVENTION, GOOD INTENTION, WRONGF UL MENTION, SHARP
DISSENSION
Take the following scenario, which could easily play out any day in
organizations around the world. It illustrates the power of verbal
communication in determining relationship eﬀectiveness. It also demonstrates
how the words we use can make the diﬀerence between success and failure in
making friends and achieving our objectives.
Stacey, a recent college graduate, secured a coveted position at a prestigious
chemical company. She completed each assigned task with passion and skill.
She kept up with new developments in the ﬁeld and always sought new and
more cost-eﬀective techniques to shore up the company’s bottom line.
One day, Stacey discovered an innovative method to reduce the cost of
manufacturing a certain chemical. It was a major breakthrough and she went
directly to her manager to report what she had found.
She could hardly contain her excitement when she entered her boss’s oﬃce
and didn’t even sit down before she blurted out the good news: “You’ve been
manufacturing this chemical all wrong. I found a new and cheaper way to do
it!”
Much to her dismay, Stacey’s manager dismissed her ﬁndings with a wave of
his hand and admonished her to concentrate on her assigned work. Crushed,
Stacey returned to her cubicle and vowed never to take the initiative again.
Sadly, Stacey never understood why her idea was rejected. In reality, her
intentions were good, but the manner in which she communicated her idea
was not well thought out or appropriate. Communication is much more than
conveying ideas; it also encompasses how you convey the ideas in real-world
situations. Stacey failed to consider some basic psychological tenets of
successful communication. In Stacey’s statement to her manager she made
several communication errors that led to her manager’s rejection of her idea.
1. “If I’m Right, Then You’re Wrong.” People rarely consider the push-pull qualities of declarations
such as “I’m right” or “My way is better.” If you are right, then the other person is
automatically assumed to be wrong. If your way is better, then the other person’s way is
automatically assumed to be worse. e “I’m right and you’re wrong” paradigm forces people
to assume a defensive posture to protect their egos or reputations, or for myriad other reasons.
A person who is forced into a defensive posture by such statements is less likely to consider
new ideas, let alone adopt them.
2. Us Against Them or I Against You. Stacey used the pronouns you and I. e use of these pronouns
creates an adversarial situation. e you and I paradigm pits one person against the other. In
Stacey’s case, she unintentionally created an adversarial relationship between herself and her
boss. Adversarial settings create winners and losers. Winners conquer; losers are left to lick their
wounds. Adversarial relationships invite competition along with negative feelings, which are
not conducive to eﬀective communication.
3. Cognitive Dissonance. Cognitive dissonance is triggered when a person holds two or more
conﬂicting beliefs simultaneously. When people experience cognitive dissonance, it is not
pleasant: ey become frustrated, angry, and experience psychological disequilibrium. In
Stacey’s situation, she unintentionally created cognitive dissonance in her manager. If Stacey is
right, then her manager is wrong. If Stacey is right, then she is smart and her manager is not so
smart. People experiencing cognitive dissonance have several options to regain their
equilibrium. In Stacey’s circumstances, her manager could admit that she is right and he is
wrong. Or he could try to convince Stacey that his method is correct and her method is not
viable. Finally, he could dismiss Stacey outright as an immature, well-meaning employee who
needs to be put in her place. Stacey’s manager chose the latter to resolve his dissonance. When
someone experiences cognitive dissonance, it rarely produces a positive outcome.
4. Ego. People are naturally egocentric; they think the world revolves around them. Stacey
demonstrated her self-focus when she used the “I” word. She elevated herself above her boss,
thus unintentionally attacking his ego. Faced with such a challenge, his thought process was
predictable. “I’ve been a manager for twenty years. Who does this inexperienced, snot-nosed
college graduate think she is? She needs to get some experience under her belt before prancing
into my oﬃce and telling me I’ve been doing things wrong for two decades. She needs to go
back to her cubicle and do as she is told.” In this instance, the manager’s ego trumped common
sense and the company’s all-important bottom line. Egos have hurt more people and torpedoed
more good ideas than one would care to admit.
LEARNING TO KEEP YOUR EGO IN CHECK
Instead of saying, “You’ve been manufacturing this chemical all wrong. I found
a new and cheaper way to do it,” Stacey should have employed psychologically
sound principles to shape her communication. A more appropriate way to
inform the boss of her signiﬁcant breakthrough would be:
“Sir, I would like your advice on something that would make our company
more proﬁtable.”
Addressing her manager as “Sir” shows respect and demonstrates that Stacey
sees her boss as a superior. e introductory phrase “I would like your advice
on something . . .” accomplishes ﬁve objectives. First, Stacey creates an
inclusionary environment. e manager feels as though he is included in the
process. Second, cognitive dissonance is avoided, thus increasing the
probability that the manager will be open to new ideas. ird, the manager’s
illusion of self-focus is bolstered. e manager will likely think, “Of course,
Stacey is seeking my advice because I am intelligent and I have twenty years of
experience behind me.” Fourth, this introductory phrase could foster a-  
mentor-mentee relationship. If this is achieved, then Stacey’s success also
becomes her manager’s success. Fifth, showing the manager respect and
acknowledging his expertise makes him feel good about himself. is brings
the Golden Rule of Friendship into play. “If you make other people feel good
about themselves, they will like you.”
People who like you are probably going to be more open to your
suggestions. e use of the words “our company” signals that Stacey has
emotional equity in the organization and is a team player. Her statement
“make our company more proﬁtable” is very appealing, especially if the
manager receives credit for an increased bottom line. When the manager gives
his advice, he takes partial ownership of the idea or proposed project. When
individuals feel as though they are part owners of a good idea or project, they
enthusiastically advance it.
THE GLORY ENCHILADA
e downside for Stacey in using the statement with her boss that we
recommend is that she must share the “glory enchilada” with him. At ﬁrst
glance, this might not seem fair or palatable since Stacey came up with the idea
and feels she should (rightfully) get all the credit. e problem is people
seldom take into account the beneﬁt of sharing the glory: goodwill. Glory has
a short expiration date; goodwill has a long shelf life. A good idea produces a
large plate that can be divided into many pieces. Freely distributing the pieces
increases likability, puts people in your debt, and gives you allies should you
need their help in gaining successes down the road.
THE CAT, THE RAT, AND THE METRONOME
Listening to what another person is saying can be diﬃcult to achieve,
particularly for extroverts. ey are so busy thinking about what they want to
say, interrupting the speaker, or letting their mind wander that they literally
don’t hear what is being said. Obviously, a person can’t respond eﬀectively to
another individual’s message if he or she doesn’t receive and process it. Is it
really possible that we can “block” out a person’s speech and not hear it? Yes.
is was demonstrated in an experiment conducted more than a half century
ago.
Psychologists conduct some pretty strange and morally suspect experiments
with animals. In this particular investigation, electrodes were implanted in the
auditory area of a cat’s brain. en they didn’t feed the cat for a few days so it
was good and hungry. Once the cat was wired and ravenous, it was placed in a
room with a metronome, an instrument that makes a clicking sound on a
regular basis. Also in the room was an oscilloscope, the kind that translates
sounds into blips on a screen, similar to the way heartbeats are represented by
spikes on a moving piece of paper.
What happened? Every time the metronome made a clicking sound, it was
picked up by the electrode implanted in the cat and simultaneously a blip
appeared on the oscilloscope screen. Translation: e cat heard the clicking
sound. Not really a very dramatic experiment, you might be thinking; hardly
worth depriving a cat of food and making it undergo an operation.
But there’s more, and here is where the experiment gets interesting. A
mouse was introduced into the room. e cat immediately turned its attention
to the potential meal, watching the rodent’s every move with intense interest.
And here’s the shocker: the oscilloscope screen went ﬂat! e metronome was
still clicking, the sound was still entering the cat’s ear, but somehow the animal
was able to block the sound at the brain level. e cat, basically, was no longer
hearing the tick, tick, tick of the metronome. It was so focused on the mouse
that it was able to block out the sounds it was “hearing.”
As it was with the cat so, too, is it with humans. We are able to block out
what a person is saying. e upshot of all this: Just because a person is
speaking to someone does not guarantee that the listener is hearing what is
being said.
e way to be sure you hear what someone is saying is to pay attention to
their verbal pronouncements. is is referred to as active listening and is
something you’ll want to practice if you want to use verbal behavior as a tool
to build new friendships.
When it comes to establishing and building friendships through verbal
behavior, take your cue from LOVE (Listen, Observe, Vocalize, and
Empathize). is acronym captures the four rules you’ll want to follow if you
want to maximize your chances for making friends through the use of
communication.
RULE #1: LISTEN: PAY ATTENTION WHEN PEOPLE SPEAK SO YOU ARE
FULLY AWARE OF WHAT THEY ARE SAYING.
Listening is more than simply remaining silent while your person of interest is
speaking. It involves total focus on what is being said. Because we can think at
about four times the rate the normal person talks, there is a temptation to let
our thoughts wander. Resist this temptation.
Speakers notice when a person isn’t listening. e best way to focus on the
listener’s speech and, at the same time, transmit to the speaker nonverbally that
you are paying attention to what is being said is to maintain eye contact. It is
also a friend signal that helps build stronger relational bonds. You needn’t stare
at the speaker to accomplish this; however, maintain eye contact with the
speaker about two-thirds to three-fourths of the time he or she is talking to
establish the appropriate degree of connectivity and to indicate you are tuned
into what is being said. Make a concerted eﬀort not to interrupt speakers when
they are talking. Extroverts must be particularly careful not to do this, as they
have a tendency to begin talking before the speaker is ﬁnished speaking, and,
in fact, ﬁnish what the person is saying to hurry the conversational turn-taking
process.
People like individuals who let them talk, particularly when it is about
themselves. As one unknown writer once observed, “Friends are those rare
people who ask how you are and then wait to hear the answer.” Wise counsel!
e empathic statement is the perfect tool to demonstrate that you are
listening to the other person. In order to form a good empathic statement, you
must listen to what the person is saying or take note of their emotional or
physical disposition. Paraphrasing what the person said keeps the focus on that
individual. For example, if you need help in a department store and you
observe that the salesperson looks tired, you might not get the service you
expect. To increase the probability of getting better service, you could use an
empathic statement such as: “You look like you’ve had a busy day” or “It’s been
a long day. Looks like you’re ready to go home.” ese empathic statements
demonstrate to the salesperson that you took the time to notice their personal
disposition, and more important, make them feel good about themselves.
During casual conversations, people tend not to listen to the person speaking.
Even a dull conversation can be enhanced using empathic statements. For
example, your coworker is talking excitedly about his weekend trip to the lake.
Unless you went to the lake with your coworker, the experience might not
interest you. An empathic statement such as “Sounds like you really enjoyed
your trip” will let the speaker know that you are listening and taking an
interest in what he or she is saying. Empathic statements are the spice of
conversations. If you make it a habit to use empathic statements, you will force
yourself to listen more carefully to other people. As a consequence they will
feel good about themselves and like you.
Remember, individuals enjoy talking about themselves and feel good when
people listen as they verbalize their thoughts, which brings us back to the
Golden Rule of Friendship. When you can make a person feel good about
themselves, they are going to be more favorably disposed to liking you and
accepting you as a friend.
BUILDING TRUST IN LESS THAN TEN MINUTES
is was the title of an article written by an anesthesiologist named Scott
Finkelstein. In the article, he describes what it’s like to face life-and-death
problems on a daily basis and emphasizes the importance of doctor-patient
communication in dealing with medical crises. “I give each patient my full
attention,” explains Dr. Finkelstein. “I maintain eye contact. I listen. I validate
their feelings, . . . e fear melts away. And then they trust me. All in less than
ten minutes.”
Giving a person the opportunity to talk, listening to what they say without
interruption, and giving nonverbal cues that what they say is of interest to you
can make a huge diﬀerence, whether it be in gaining a patient’s trust or a
person’s friendship.
RULE #2: OBSERVE: IN ANY VERBAL INTERACTION BE SURE TO OBSERVE
THE OTHER PARTY BEFORE, DURING, AND AFTER RECEIVING AND
TRANSMITTING INFORMATION.
Whenever you interact with another person, communication takes place on
two levels: verbal and nonverbal. Before, during, and after verbal interaction it
is important that you observe the other individual’s nonverbal signals and body
language, as they can serve as a barometer to assess if a conversation is
appropriate, how an ongoing conversation is progressing, what impact the
conversation had when ﬁnished, and, also, as a warning should something be
said that a party to the verbal exchange ﬁnds objectionable. Backward leaning,
crossing the arms over the chest, and lip compressions are good nonverbal
indicators that the conversation is not being well received. People tend to
distance themselves from things they don’t want to see or hear. is is the
opposite of the leaning-forward nonverbal cue discussed earlier. Crossing the
arms over the chest is a blocking gesture, which could indicate the person
wants to symbolically and physically block what they are seeing or hearing.
Other signs of disengagement are looking around the room, when the person
looks at their watch as if to say, “Time’s up,” or turning their feet, torso, or
both toward the door or other parts of the room. When you see the other
person beginning to disengage from the conversation, change the subject. You
are probably spending too much time talking about yourself and not focusing
on the other person.
It is important to observe nonverbal behavior even before any attempt at
conversation is made. Of course, the importance of observation doesn’t stop
there. Should a person’s nonverbals signal that beginning a conversation is
appropriate, then let the talking commence. Just don’t take that as the reason
for ending your observation! Continual observation during an ongoing verbal
interaction is critica l for spotting any potential problems that might otherwise
go unnoticed.
is is particularly true when it co mes to “word mines.”
Words mean diﬀerent things to diﬀerent people. When these words are
used they can, like land mines, blow apart a developing relationship. When a
party to the conversation is oﬀended by one of these word mines, he or she
doesn’t normally say anything about their discomfort but simply begins the
process of distancing and/or exiting the relationship. However, their nonverbal
behavior often provides a clear indication that something troubling was said.
ey might wince, get a shocked or surprised look on their face, or take a step
backward. A person who is processing information on the verbal and
nonverbal levels will pick up these signals and can often save the day by asking
if they said something oﬀensive and, if so, assuring the listener that it certainly
wasn’t their intention to do so. A further examination of what the oﬀending
word means to both parties can usually put any bad feelings to rest and the
conversation can restart on a positive note. e hazard of word mines is that
people don’t know what emotional meanings others attach to otherwise
innocuous words.
IS IT SOMETHING I SAID?
A friend was lecturing about interviewing techniques to a group of seminar
participants. At one point he said, “People need to listen more than they talk.
e proof of this is the Lord gave you two ears and one mouth, so you should
listen twice as much as you speak.”
During the lunch break, the conference host walked into the banquet room
and informed my friend that a charge had been ﬁled against him by the Equal
Employment Opportunity Commission. She had come to investigate exactly
what happened. My friend was dumbfounded. He had no idea who would ﬁle
such a complaint and why they would do it.
It turned out that one of the attendees had a son who was born with only
one ear, and when my friend made the remark about “two ears and one
mouth,” this father thought my friend was making fun of his child.
Once my friend was told of the circumstances surrounding the complaint,
he explained to the host that his comment was a truism that had been around
for decades and when he said it, he in no way meant it as a slight against
anyone.
e host wasn’t moved. “If the father is oﬀended,” she said, “it’s his
perspective of what happened we need to address, whether you think it is
oﬀensive or not.”
My friend thought the entire situation was ludicrous. He didn’t see that he
had done anything wrong and certainly didn’t want to apologize to the father
for what he saw as perfectly acceptable language.
e host would have none of it. “If you want to keep this consulting job,
you need to apologize to the father.”
Faced with that ultimatum, my friend decided discretion was the better part
of valor and oﬀered his apology to the distraught father.
WHEN EVERYTHING ISN’T BLACK-AND-WHITE
e classroom seems to provide a particularly conducive environment for word
mines to rattle an unsuspecting lecturer. Two reasons for this is the diversity of
today’s student body and the larger number of enrollees in any particular
course. When it comes to racial issues, teachers must tiptoe carefully through
their lectures, being careful not to set oﬀ a word mine by using words or
phrases that mean diﬀerent things to diﬀerent students. In one of my classes, I
couldn’t get my laptop to boot up. Every time I switched it on all I got was a
black screen. So I asked my students, “Does anyone here know how to make
this thing work?” One student nodded, walked over to the laptop, made a few
adjustments to the machine, and handed it back to me. I said, “Well, the
screen is white and white is better than black at least.”
A black student in the class took immediate oﬀense at my comment. “I
heard you say ‘white is better than black,’ ” he declared. “at’s a racist
remark.”
I had no intention of making a racial slur. Race never crossed my mind. I
was anxious to get my laptop functional so I could present my lecture. My
comment referred to how my laptop was operating. A black screen indicated
the laptop was not booting up. A white screen indicated that the laptop was
booting up. In other words, a laptop that is booting up is better than a laptop
that is not booting up. Yet, my student heard the comment from a diﬀerent
perspective and it triggered a deep emotional response. Such is the nature and
danger of word mines.
Another teacher related another good example of this to me. She teaches a
course in international management, which means a large number of students
from other countries are in attendance. At the beginning of one class, about
halfway through the semester, a male American student walked up to another
male student and greeted him by saying, “How’s it going, dawg?!” e
recipient of this greeting almost punched the speaker in the mouth. It turns
out that the angry student was from the Middle East, where it is considered a
great insult to be referred to as a “dog.”
Word mines. Watch for them and be ready to treat the injured relationship
quickly and decisively so as to minimize any damage done. It’s worth saying
again: the hazard of word mines is that speakers do not know what emotional
meanings others attach to otherwise innocuous words. us, they never know
when a word mine can be “set oﬀ.” If, as noted earlier, speakers are not
watching the listener, they might not be aware that they insulted or oﬀended
them.
Even if they do become aware that they have set oﬀ a negative response in
the listener, most speakers, rather than trying to defuse the situation, tend to
respond defensively to the unexpected emotional outburst, which
unfortunately only intensiﬁes the initial response of that individual. A speaker
who steps on a word mine and reacts defensively when confronted with an
angry listener is often seen as insensitive and lacking compassion. e speaker,
on the other hand, is often left confused, not knowing what to do or what to
say in response to the listener’s emotional explosion.
Empathic statements are the best way to respond to word mine explosions.
ey capture a person’s feelings and reﬂect them back to the person, using
parallel language. Empathic statements acknowledge the person’s feelings
without the need to go on the defensive.
As you’ll recall from an earlier chapter, the basic formula for constructing
empathic statements is “So you . . .” is basic approach keeps the focus on the
other person and away from the individual who stepped on the word mine.
People naturally tend to say something to the eﬀect of “I understand how you
feel.” at leads the other person to automatically think, No, you don’t know
how I feel because you are not me.
Empathic statements allow individuals to vent their emotions. Once the
pent-up emotions are vented, the conversation can usually return to a normal
exchange of information. Avoiding a heated argument with an emotional
person increases the probability that the relationship will have a chance to
survive and grow.
Once you step on a word mine, learn from it. Be sure to aﬃx a mental red
ﬂag to avoid detonations in the future. Unfortunately, the problem of word
mines is unlikely to go away in the near future. In fact, the virtual world in
which we live is strewn with dangerous word mines. You can never be sure
when you will step on one. Personal relationships are more diﬃcult to initiate
and maintain when the verbal landscape is dotted with word mines, both
discovered and hidden.
Communication mishaps are likely to increase in the coming years because
people rely more and more on electronic media such as texting, emails, and
Internet postings to communicate. Symbols such as brackets, periods, and
commas that form happy, winking, or surprised faces often punctuate
sentences to provide additional clues to the reader as to the true meaning of
the communication. Emoticons are also used to clarify messages. When text
messaging ﬁrst became popular, I remember texting my daughter. She
responded to one of my text messages with the letters “LOL.” I wrote back, “I
love you too.” Her response was “Ha, ha. LOL means laugh out loud.” I wrote
back, “I thought it meant Lots of Love.” Her ﬁnal exchange was “I love you
too, Dad.” My communication faux pas with my daughter ended with a
chuckle, but it demonstrates the danger of miscommunication when people
don’t have nonverbal cues to guide a conversation. When using electronic
media to communicate, don’t use sarcasm, understatements, or words that have
double meanings if you want to avoid the possibility of miscommunication.
e best way to keep your verbal communication eﬀective in a world ﬁlled
with word mines is to:
1. ink about the words you are going to use before you say them. Scan ahead for possible word
mines that you’ll want to eliminate from your speech.
2. Observe your listeners for any unusual reaction while you are speaking. It might indicate that a
word mine has been tripped.
3. Do not become defensive or angry if a listener becomes agitated over your use of a word mine
(even if you didn’t know it existed); and
4. Immediately take the time to ﬁnd out if the listener’s discomfort is the result of a word mine
detonation. If it is, apologize for using the word or phrase, explain that you were unaware that
it had a negative connotation to the listener, and assure him or her that you will not use it
again. And then, be sure you don’t.
THE LIP PURSE
No one can read minds, but they can come close by observing non verbal
displays. Some nonverbal cues are more obvious than others. e obvious cues
are easier for observers to read and interpret. Likewise, obvious cues are easier
for speakers to control, thus camouﬂaging their true thoughts. Subtle
nonverbal cues are harder to control and reveal more intimate information.
e lips are one area of the body that can reveal these subtle cues.
A lip purse display is a slight, almost imperceptible, puckering or rounding
of the lips (see photos on page 135). is gesture signals dissension or
disagreement. e more pronounced the lip purse, the more intense is the
dissension or disagreement. Pursed lips mean the person has formed a thought
in their mind that is in opposition to what is being said or done.
Knowing what a person thinks gives you an advantage. e trick is to
change their mind before they have an opportunity to articulate their
opposition. Once an opinion or decision is expressed out loud, changing a
person’s mind becomes more diﬃcult due to the psychological principle of
consistency. Decision-making causes tension to some degree. When a person
makes a decision, tension dissipates. ey are less likely to change their mind
because to do so would mean admitting their ﬁrst decision was a bad one, thus
causing tension. Maintaining an articulated position causes less tension than
going through the  decision-making process again no matter how persuasive the
arguments for change may be. In other words, when people say something,
they tend to remain consistent with what they said.
Pursed Lips
Observing for lip purses is also useful when talking with your spouse,
colleagues, and friends, as it is a universal nonverbal cue that tells us what
people are thinking. However, a lip purse is not a foe signal; someone can be
happy with you and still use it.
Again, remember why watching for and observing lip purses is so critical:
Once a person is able to articulate a “No” response to your idea or suggestion,
or voice a negative remark, the principle of “consistency” comes into play,
meaning now it is very hard for the listener to go back on their verbal response
and change their mind. e lip purse allows you to see a negative response
coming and gives you a chance to counter it before it is spoken, giving you a
better chance of getting your idea or project accepted.
You can use this nonverbal signal to help you increase your verbal
eﬀectiveness at home and at work. As an example, consider this statement you
might make to your wife:
“Honey, I can show you how we can aﬀord a bass boat [or substitute with
any item you may wish to purchase] so I can go ﬁshing.”
Now, as you begin to present your ﬁnancial argument you can see your
wife’s lips purse. She has formed a sentence in her mind, which is in opposition
to what you are saying. (Her lip purse is telling you she doesn’t want you to get
into her purse!) You know now that you have to come up with an additional
justiﬁcation before she articulates her objection; otherwise her public
proclamation will make it more diﬃcult for you to end up with a boat or any
other big-ticket item you wish to purchase. Ladies, this technique also applies
to men.
WHEN THE BOSS GIVES YOU A LIP (PURS E)
At work, I was always trying to get money or manpower support for some
operation I wanted to run. Both were in short supply and I had to compete for
resources. I remember once explaining to my boss why I needed money for this
particular project and I saw him purse his lips. Now I knew he thought up a
statement in opposition to what I was saying and I needed to change his mind
before he had a chance to say no. If he publicly rejected my proposal, getting
his approval would be next to impossible.
In an attempt to forestall a verbal rejection, I used an empathic statement.
“Boss, I’ll bet you’re thinking that this idea isn’t going to work, but let me
explain why it will.” I knew exactly what point the boss had issues with,
because his lips pursed when I made a speciﬁc statement. Now I knew what
was troubling him and my statement bought me some time to respond to his
concern and convince him my idea was worthy before he made any verbal
declaration, which is hard to reverse once it is publicly stated.
e next time you present a project or proposition to your supervisor,
watch for the lip purse display. If your supervisor purses his or her lips during
your presentation, you know that he or she has already formed a thought in
opposition to your proposal. Once you see a lip purse, you should attempt to
change your supervisor’s mind before he or she vocalizes opposition. Be ready
with an empathic statement. Try: “So, you don’t think what I am saying makes
much sense. Let me go over a few things that will show you that what I am
proposing is the best course of action.” You acknowledge your supervisor’s
doubts and present counterarguments to change his or her mind before the
negative thought is voiced.
Lip Bite
LIP BITE
Another technique to “read a person’s mind” is to watch for a lip bite. A lip
bite is the soft biting or tugging of the upper or lower lip with the teeth. is
nonverbal gesture indicates that the person has something to say but is hesitant
to say it, for myriad reasons. Hence the old adage “Bite your lip,” meaning
keep your mouth shut and don’t say anything has validity. I often see lip biting
when I lecture. I’ll take it as a signal to construct an empathic statement such
as “It looks like you want to add something to the conversation,” to encourage
the students to express themselves. Most students are surprised that I can read
their minds and they feel good about themselves because I’m paying attention
to them.
LIP COMPRESSION
Lip compression has a similar meaning to the lip bite, but it has a more
negative connotation. A lip compression occurs when the upper and lower lips
are tightly pressed together. e lip compression indicates that the person you
are talking to has something to say but is reluctant to do so. Right before
suspects confess, I often saw a lip compression. e suspects wanted to say
something but they pressed their lips together to prevent the words from
coming out.
Lip Compression
LIP TOUCHING
Self-touching of the lips with hands, ﬁngers, or objects such as pencils and
other inanimate objects indicates the person is feeling uneasy about the topic
that is being discussed. Stimulating the lips momentarily draws your attention
away from the sensitive topic and thus reduces anxiety. Suspects would often
unwittingly signal to me that the question I just asked exposed a sensitive topic
or made them feel uncomfortable. Seeing this silent cue, I would construct an
empathic statement such as “You seem a bit uncomfortable talking about this
topic,” to further explore the topic. e suspect would either conﬁrm or deny
that they were uncomfortable and, in most cases, provide reasons for feeling
the way they did.
Lip touching demonstrates that the person is feeling uneasy or uncomfortable.
is self-touching signal can be eﬀectively used in business and social
settings. For example, if you are in a one-to-one sales meeting presenting a new
product and you see your client lightly rubbing his lips with his ﬁngers, take
note. Upon seeing this nonverbal cue, you should formulate an empathic
statement such as “is may be a bit overwhelming because you have never
used this product before” to allow the client to express any concerns or
misgivings they might have about the product or service you are oﬀering. Once
you have identiﬁed your client’s speciﬁc concerns you can adapt your sales
presentation to more eﬀectively sell your product or service.
In social settings, you can avoid embarrassing moments by observing the
person you are talking to. If you introduce a sensitive topic and you see the
other person pursing or compressing their lips, you are best advised to change
the subject before more damage is done. You can safely return to the subject
when suﬃcient rapport has been built between you and the other person.
RULE #3: VOCALIZE: THE WAY YOU VOCALIZE AND WHAT YOU VOCALIZE
WILL IMPACT YOUR EFFECTIVENESS IN MAKING AND KEEPING FRIENDS
How you say something can sometimes be as important as the message itself.
Of particular concern is your tone of voice, which transmits information to the
listener irrespective of what is being said. Attraction and interest, for example,
are communicated much more by the tone of voice than by the words being
spoken.
HOW YOU SPEAK INFLUENCES HOW OTHERS PERCEIVE YOUR
MESSAGE . . . AND YOU
Tone of voice can convey messages that words alone can’t. A deep, low-pitched
voice conveys romantic interest. A high-pitched voice conveys surprise or
skepticism. A loud voice will give the impression that you are overbearing. e
tone of voice you use can embrace others or dismiss them out of hand.
e speed of your voice also regulates conversations. Fast talking adds a
sense of urgency to the conversation or can act as a prompt to end a boring
exchange. Dragging out a word can signal interest. Actors in movies often drag
out the greeting “Hello” to signal romantic interest. Conversely, a slow, soft-
spoken monotone voice signals lack of interest in the listener or extreme
shyness in the speaker. Conversely, a slow, soft-spoken voice with normal
inﬂections conveys empathy. I often hear this type of communication at
funerals or during tragedies.
Most parents learn to control their kids’ behavior with tonal inﬂections. I
often spoke to my kids in a deep, slow voice to express my displeasure. As with
many parents, if I was extremely displeased, I would drag out my kid’s ﬁrst,
middle, and last name with great eﬀect. A short, clipped “Good” expresses
approval.
Tone of voice delivers the emotional part of your message. I have a Chicago
accent and I tend to clip my words. When I’m in Chicago, word clipping goes
unnoticed because everybody clips their words. However, when I travel to
other parts of the country, people perceive word clipping as being overbearing
and dismissive. Sarcasm can also be misinterpreted without the accompanying
tone of voice that lets the listener know that there is a hidden meaning to the
message. is is the reason why sarcasm should be avoided in emails and text
messages.
Voice intonation also plays a large part in conversational turn-taking.
Lowering your voice at the end of a sentence signals that you are ﬁnished
talking and it is now the other person’s turn to talk. If the speaker lowers their
voice at the end of a sentence and continues to talk, the listener will become
frustrated because they think it’s their turn to talk. Dominating a conversation
violates the Golden Rule of Friendship by keeping the focus of attention on
yourself instead of on the other person.
Conversely, taking your turn to speak when your person of interest has not
given any vocal “turn-yielding cues,” even if he or she has ﬁnished a sentence,
can impede friendship development. Violating conversation etiquette can cause
irritation and have a detrimental eﬀect on friendship development.
Make it a habit to pause for a nanosecond or two before speaking, especially
if you are an extrovert. is pause gives introverts a chance to gather their
thoughts. Remember, introverts tend to think before they speak. If you
interrupt their thought process, they tend to become frustrated and,
consequently, like you less. e pause gives extroverts time to think about what
they are about to say. is habit saved me from countless embarrassing
moments.
WHAT YOU SAY INFLUENCES HOW OTHERS PERCEIVE YOUR MESSAGE . . .
AND YOU
is seems like common sense and, to a degree, it is. But the focus here is on
saying certain things or saying them in a certain way that you might not
otherwise use to make and keep friends. Here are some verbal strategies you
can use to make or keep friends in everyday situations, strategies you might
otherwise ignore or downplay, to the detriment of your relationships.
Strategy #1: When you are right and someone else is wrong, give that
individual a face-saving way to carry out your wishes with a minimum of
embarrassment and/or humiliation. e person will like you a lot more for
your eﬀorts on their behalf.
Human beings have an inherent need to be right, but being right comes
with some unintended consequences. One of those is the loss of friendship if
the person who is right doesn’t give the person who is wrong a face-saving way
to extrica te himself or herself from the situation in question.
I learned this the hard way while presenting a lecture on report writing to a
group of parole and probation oﬃcers. Prior to the beginning of my lecture, I
spoke with several of the participants about their current report writing
practices . One participant identiﬁed his super visor as the writing guru. e
other participants agreed and made comments such as “He really knows his
stuﬀ,” “He’s a wordsmith,” “He forces us to use a variety of words to say the
same thing,” and “I don’t know what we would do without him.”
I glanced over at the supervisor. His eyes were alight and he was smiling
proudly. at conversation and the supervisor’s reaction was a red ﬂag I failed
to recognize until it was too late. e supervisor’s esteem was wrapped up in
his identity as the group’s grammar guru. His value to the agency also stemmed
from his reputation as an outstanding writer.
During my lecture, I demonstrated a simple yet eﬀective method to write
reports patterned after the FBI model for producing such documents. Several
participants commented they were going to start using this model because it
was easier and reduced the possibility of their reports being successfully
challenged in court.
I was taken aback when the supervisor protested. He argued that the
method of writing I was teaching may work for the FBI, but it was not suitable
for his agency. He declared that he was a college English major and believed
that creative reports using synonyms were more interesting than reports using
the same words over and over. I then made a fatal mistake by engaging the
supervisor in spontaneous role playing to prove that I was right and,
consequently, that he was wrong. I asked him what synonyms he would use for
the verb said. He oﬀered the following alternatives: told, explained, and
mentioned. I stopped him there and told him to play the role of a witness in
court and I would play the role of defense attorney. He agreed. e exchange
went like this:
ME (DEFENSE ATTORNEY): Oﬃcer, please deﬁne the word stated as you used it in your
report.
SUPERVISOR (OFFICER): Express a fact with certainty.
ME (DEFENSE ATTORNEY): ank you oﬃcer. How would you deﬁne the word explained as
you used the word in your report?
SUPERVISOR (OFFICER): To talk about.
ME (DEFENSE ATTORNEY): ank you, Oﬃcer. So what you wrote is that what my client
initially said he said with certainty and the second thing my client said he did not say with
certainty.
SUPERVISOR (OFFICER): “No, that’s not what I meant. e suspect said both things with
certainty.”
ME (DEFENSE ATTORNEY): at’s not what you wrote. By your own deﬁnitions of the
words said and explain, you are saying that the ﬁrst statement was said with certainty and that
the second statement was not said with certainty. Is that correct?
SUPERVISOR (OFFICER): No, both statements were said with certainty.
ME (DEFENSE ATTORNEY): If both statements were said with certainty, then why didn’t you
use the word said in both sentences?
SUPERVISOR (OFFICER): Uhhh. I don’t know.
I won my point, but it was a Pyrrhic victory. My need to be right caused
everything to go wrong. From that point forward, the tension in the room was
obvious. I forced the participants to choose between a more eﬃcient method
of writing and their supervisor’s less eﬃcient method of writing. Of course,
they sided with their supervisor.
e unintended consequences of being right occur every day in oﬃces and
homes across the country. We unintentionally alienate our bosses, colleagues,
friends, and spouses and cause unnecessary strife and tension.
ere is a better way. You can be right without wronging someone. Instead
of asserting your right to be right, ask people for their advice. at allows them
to be part of the decision-making process. Additionally, they feel good about
themselves because you came to them to seek their advice, which elevates them
to an honored position. e Golden Rule of Friendship states that if you make
people feel good about themselves, they will like you.
Using this “ask for advice” strategy still allows you to be right, get the results
you want, and maintain (or increase) friendships with those individuals who
now have a face-saving way to maintain their dignity and avoid being seen as
“wrong.”
e following exchange between a subordinate and her boss illustrates the
technique of seeking advice. e subordinate found an error in a newly formed
controversial policy prepared by her boss. Rather than trumping her boss with
the “right” card, she sought her super visor’s advice.
SUBORDINATE: Do you have a minute, Boss?
BOSS: Sure, what’s up?
SUBORDINATE: I was reviewing your latest policy and noticed something. I’d like your advice
on the matter.
BOSS: Sure. Let me take a look.
e subordinate can now point out the discrepancies in the policy and her
supervisor has the opportunity to clarify his mistake without losing face.
Salespeople can use the same technique when they meet longtime customers
or new customers. Textbook publisher representatives regularly visit my oﬃce
pitching new books for use in my classes. Instead of personalizing their sales
approach, they tell me how their book is better than the one I am currently
using. e sales rep could be right, but there are unintended consequences of
such an approach. e salesperson is implying that my judgment in picking
textbooks is bad. is realization does not make me feel good about myself. I
would be more likely to listen to the representatives if they introduced
themselves and then said, “Professor, I would like to get your advice about this
new book designed for use in your course.”
THE FACE-SAVING TECHNIQUE THAT AVOIDED A MUG SHOT
As an FBI agent, I always dreaded the moment I would be ﬂying somewhere
on a long-awaited vacation and be called upon to deal with an unruly
passenger or handle a crisis. Well, it happened on a 6 a.m. ﬂight out of Los
Angeles. I had boarded and was sitting quietly in my seat when a ﬂight
attendant came up and said there was a drunk passenger in the back of the
plane whom the captain wanted oﬄoaded. I looked around and, sure enough,
there was a passenger staggering in the aisle while another ﬂight attendant was
yelling at him. “You get oﬀ this ﬂight . . . you’re an idiot.” So much for trying
to calm things down. e attendant standing over me said, “You’re an FBI
agent, take him oﬀ the plane.”
I thought, “I might as well use a bit of my training.” So I walked over to
where the man was leaning against his seat. I told him I was an FBI agent,
showed him my badge and credentials, and suggested we both sit down and
talk. He wasn’t so drunk that he failed to understand me. He sat down and I
edged into the empty seat next to him.
“Look,” I said, in a soft voice that would be diﬃcult for other passengers to
hear, “the endgame is you’re getting oﬀ this plane. When the captain says
you’re getting oﬀ, you’re getting oﬀ. Now, you have a choice. Either you can
walk oﬀ and keep your dignity, voice your complaints once you’re in the
terminal, and complete your trip to Dallas on a later ﬂight . . . or I’m going to
arrest you, put you in handcuﬀs, and forcibly take you oﬀ the plane. en
you’re going to go to jail, have to bail yourself out, and come back here for a
trial, where you might be sentenced to prison. So,” I whispered to him, “sir, the
choice is yours. I’ll allow you to make this decision. Take a few seconds to
think about it. W hat do you want to do?”
It only took a moment for the passenger to say, “I think I’ll just get oﬀ,
make my complaint, and get on another plane.”
I said, “I think that’s a very intelligent decision. Here, I’ll be glad to walk
you oﬀ.”
After I had accompanied the man to the terminal and returned to my seat,
the ﬂight attendant who had spoken to me earlier came up and wanted to
know how I had managed to end such an ugly confrontation so peacefully. I
told her I had given the passenger the opportunity to make a choice on his
own.
I gave him the opportunity to feel he had some control in the  situation,
that he was free to choose his fate. And, most important, I provided him with
a face-saving way to exit th e aircraft with a minimum of embarrassment.
FOOD FOR THOUGHT
Giving someone the feeling they have some control over a situation can work wonders, even with children. In
fact, parents can use this approach to help their kids make decisions, especially when they are younger.
Children, like adults, want to feel as though they are in control of their lives. The illusion of control can be
conveyed if parents give their kids an opportunity to choose their destiny. This can be accomplished without
losing parental authority. For example, you are taking your son out to lunch. You have already made up your
mind that you are either going to McDonald’s or Burger King for a kid’s meal. You don’t want to let your child
choose another restaurant, yet, you still want him to practice his decision-making skills. This can be
accomplished by setting up an alternate response question such as “We are going to lunch. Do you want to go
to McDonald’s or Burger King for a kid’s meal?” An alternate response question gives your child an illusion of
control, but you are really in control because you limited the restaurant choice to McDonald’s or Burger King and
you limited the food choice to a kid’s meal.
Salespeople use the alternate response question all the time. When you go to a car dealership, a good
salesperson will not ask you if you want to buy a car. They will ask you if you like blue cars or red cars. If you
answer, “Blue cars,” the salesperson will show you blue cars. If you answer, “Red cars,” the salesperson will
show you red cars. If your answer is a color other than blue or red, then the salesperson will show you that color
of car. Good salespeople give the customers the illusion that they are in control of the car buying experience,
when in fact the salespeople are directing you through a well-choreographed presentation.
Strategy #2: Use the verbal technique of “status elevation” to make people
feel better about themselves and see you as a friend. Status elevation is a
technique that satisﬁes an individual’s need for recognition. I discovered this
approach one day when I was with my son, Bryan, at a bookstore. An author
was signing books at a booth in the front of the store. Nobody was at the
booth, so Bryan and I went over to talk with the author. While my son spoke
with the woman, I looked through her book. I noticed that her style of writing
reminded me of Jane Austen. I mentioned this to the author. Her eyes lit up
and her cheeks took on a pinkish hue. She replied, “Really? I don’t have much
time to write. I have three kids. My husband is in the military and is gone a lot
of the time. I want to go back to college to ﬁnish my degree. I left school to get
married. at was a mistake I’ll always regret.” With one comment, this
woman was telling me her life story like I was a long-lost friend.
I tried this technique several more times with the same results. Once, I met
an aspiring candidate from the Republican Party. After we talked politics for
several minutes, I remarked that his political style reminded me of Ronald
Regan. e young man puﬀed up and told me about his family upbringing,
where he went to college, and many other personal details that indicated he
saw me as someone worthy of being liked. Status elevation can take the form
of a simple compliment.
MOPPING UP A SCHOOL GRAFFITI PROBLE M
On one occasion, I interviewed a janitor at a high school regarding some racist
graﬃti that had appeared sometime during the previous night. At the outset of
the interview, I attempted to build some rapport with him. I commented that
he had a big job taking care of such a large building all by himself. He told me
about how he designed a system that allowed him to accomplish multiple tasks
at the same time by following the shortest routes through the building. I
responded that most schools of the same size would require several janitors to
accomplish the work he did using the system he designed (I was providing him
with an opportunity to pat himself on the back).
As we talked, it was clear that I had developed a solid rapport with the
janitor. He explained to me in great detail about how he designed his
maintenance routine and went on to share stories about the teachers and
administrative staﬀ. e tales were interesting but of no use to my
investigation. But I listened anyway, and gained a friend in the process. I gave
him my business card and asked him to call me if he learned any new
information about the graﬃti incident.
Several weeks later, the janitor called me with a rumor he had heard from
one of the students. e rumor turned out to be true and led to the
apprehension of the parties responsible for the graﬃti.
It is doubtful that the janitor would have taken the time to call me about
the rumor he heard if I had not developed a good rapport with him during our
only visit.
Strategy #3: If you want to get information from somebody without
arousing their suspicion or putting them on the defensive, use the elicitation
approach. You use elicitation devices in conversation to obtain information
from a person without that individual becoming sensitive (aware) of your
purpose.
People often hesitate to answer direct questions, especially when the
inquiries focus on sensitive topics. If you want people to like you, use
elicitation instead of questions to obtain sensitive information. Elicitation
techniques encourage people to reveal sensitive information without the need
for making inquiries.
Asking questions puts people on the defensive. Nobody likes nosy
individuals, especially when you ﬁrst meet them. Ironically, this is the time you
need the most information about persons of interest. e more information
you know about an individual, the better you will be able to develop strategies
to cultivate successful personal and business relationships.
Elicitation is the ability to obtain sensitive information from people
without them realizing they are providing you with this data. During my
career in the intelligence community, I trained agents to obtain sensitive
information from adversaries while at the same time maintaining good rapport
with them. e characteristics of elicitation:
1. Few, if any questions are asked, thus preventing a defensive reaction from the person of
interest;
2. the process is painless because your person of interest is not aware they are revealing sensitive
personal information;
3. people will like you because you are making them the focus of your undivided attention; and
4. individuals will thank you for being so kind and will likely contact you in the future, which
provides another opportunity to glean additional information from them.
Elicitation works because it is based on human needs.
The Human Need to Correct: Using Elicitation Through Presumptive Statements
People have a need to be right, but people have a stronger need to correct
others. e need to be correct and/or to correct others is almost irresistible.
Making presumptive statements is an elicitation technique that presents a fact
that can be either right or wrong. If the presumptive is correct, people will
aﬃrm the fact and often provide additional information. If the presumptive is
wrong, people will provide the correct answer, usually accompanied by a
detailed explanation as to why it is correct.
Recently I was buying a piece of jewelry, but I was hoping to not pay retail.
In order to negotiate the best price, I had to know the markup on the jewelry
in the store where I was going to make the purchase and also the clerk’s
commission, if any. For obvious reasons, this information is closely held. I
knew if I asked direct questions about prices, I would not get the answers I
needed to negotiate the best deal, so I used elicitation to get the information I
wanted.
CLERK: May I help you?
ME: Yes, I’m looking for a diamond pendant for my wife.
CLERK: We have lots of those. Let me show you what we have.
e clerk handed me a velvet case containing several pendants. I looked
intently at one of them.
ME: How much is this one?
CLERK: One hundred and ninety dollars.
ME: Woooh, the markup must be at least 150 percent. (presumptive statement)
CLERK: No. It’s only 50 percent.
ME: And then your 10 percent commission. (presumptive statement)
CLERK: Not that much. I only get 5 percent.
ME: I suppose you don’t have the authority to discount. (presumptive statement)
CLERK: I am authorized to give a 10 percent discount. Anything after that, the manager has to
approve.
At this point, I could either take the 10 percent discount or press further.
Given the poor economic conditions when I visited this jewelry store, I
suspected the manager would be willing to give me a further discount, if he
still made a proﬁt.
ME: Ask the manager if he will sell this piece at a 40 percent discount. (I waited patiently as the
clerk went into the back room. She returned a few minutes later.)
CLERK: He said the best he can do is 30 percent if you pay cash.
ME: It’s a present for my wife.
Clerk: No problem. I’ll gift wrap it for you. (I not only saved $57, but got gift wrapping, too!)
In this case, using elicitation instead of direct questions yielded valuable
information. I was able to ascertain the markup on the jewelry (50 percent)
and the clerk’s commission (5 percent), which allowed me to negotiate with
conﬁdence. If I did not want to negotiate, I could have taken the automatic 10
percent discount for a savings of $19. Had the clerk not divulged this
information, I would have paid full price. Based on the clerk’s behavior, she did
not realize she had revealed closely held information.
EMPATHIC ELICITATION
e Empathic Statement is versatile because it can be combined with
elicitation techniques. Two empathic elicitation techniques that are based on
the human need to correct will be discussed, the empathic presumptive and the
empathic conditional. Salespeople routinely use empathic elicitation. Customers
are less likely to buy something from someone they don’t like. Salespeople use
empathic elicitation to accomplish two goals. First, empathic statements
quickly build rapport, and second, empathic elicitation gleans information
from customers that they would not normally reveal under direct questioning.
EMPATHIC PRESUMPTIVE
e empathic presumptive keeps the focus of the conversation on the customer
and presents a fact as the truth. e presumptive can be either true or an
assumed fact regardless of its veracity. If the presumptive is true, the customer
will usually add new information to the conversation.
e salesperson could then construct another empathic statement based on
the customer’s response to prompt more information. If the presumptive is
false, the customer will typically correct the presumptive. Just look at this
example:
SALESPERSON: May I help you?
CUSTOMER: Yes, I have to buy a new washer and dryer.
SALESPERSON: So, your old washer and dryer are on their last legs? (empathic presumptive)
CUSTOMER: No, I’m moving to a small apartment.
SALESPERSON: Oh, so you’ll need a compact washer and dryer. Let me show you a popular
stacked unit that we sell.
CUSTOMER: Okay.
e salesperson listened to what the customer said, “I have to buy a new
washer and dryer,” which suggests the customer’s current washer and dryer are
not functioning well. e salesperson used the empathic presumptive to keep
the focus on the customer and encourage the customer to aﬃrm or deny the
presumptive, “So, your old washer and dryer are on their last legs?” e
customer corrected the salesperson by saying, “I’m moving to a small
apartment.” is added information identiﬁes what type of unit the
salesperson should direct the customer to. e words “have to buy” indicates
that the customer is serious about buying a washing machine and dryer as
opposed to just looking. e salesperson obtained important facts during the
opening exchange of information. First, the customer is a serious buyer and the
sales person knows exactly what category of washer and dryer the customer is
likely to purchase. is information saves the customer and the salesperson
time. e customer goes home with the product he needs and the salesperson
has more time to serve other customers.
EMPATHIC CONDITIONAL
e empathic conditional keeps the focus of the conversation on the customer
and introduces a set of circumstances under which the customer would
purchase a product or service.
SALESPERSON: Can I help you?
CUSTOMER: No, I’m just looking.
SALESPERSON: So, you haven’t decided which model you want to buy. (empathic statement)
CUSTOMER: I need a new car, but I’m not sure I can aﬀord one.
SALESPERSON: So you’d buy a car, if it were priced right? (empathic conditional)
CUSTOMER: Sure.
SALESPERSON: Do you like red or blue cars?
CUSTOMER: Blue.
SALESPERSON: Let’s take a look at some blue cars in your price range.
In response to the empathic elicitation, the customer identiﬁed the reason
preventing him from buying a car. e salesperson then used the empathic
conditional approach. e empathic conditional keeps the focus on the
customer and, at the same time, sets up the if/then conditional “So you’d buy a
car, if it were priced right?” e underlying presumption is that the customer is
going to buy a car if certain conditions are met. In this case, the condition is
price. e empathic conditional helped the salesperson to identify a buying
objective. With this new information, the salesperson can direct the customer
to lines of cars within his price range.
THE NEED TO RECIPROCATE USING THE PRINCIPLE OF QUID PRO QUO
When people receive something either physically or emotionally, they feel the
need to reciprocate by giving back something of equal or greater value (Law of
Reciprocity). Quid pro quo is an elicitation technique that encourages people
to match information provided by others. For example, you meet a person for
the ﬁrst time and want to know where they work. Instead of directly asking
them, “Where do you work?” tell them where you work ﬁrst. People will tend
to reciprocate by telling you where they work. is elicitation technique can be
used to discover information about people without being intrusive and
appearing nosy.
If you don’t want people to know where you work but are still curious
about where they are employed, you can get the needed information from the
other person and short-circuit reciprocity by asking the question in a novel
way. Say, “Where do you labor?” is question requires additional cognitive
processing, which disrupts the need to reciprocate with the question, “Where
do you work?”
I used the need to reciprocate when I interviewed suspects. I would always
oﬀer the suspect something to drink such as coﬀee, tea, water, or soda at the
beginning of the interview (the television term is interrogation). I did this to
invoke the need to reciprocate. In return for the drink, I hope to receive
something in return such as intelligence information or a confession.
During your conversation, you should seek common ground (Law of
Similarity) with the other person. You should also use empathic statements to
keep the focus on that individual. In short, you want to make the other person
feel good about themselves (Golden Rule of Friendship), and if you are
successful, they will like you and seek future opportunities to share your
company.
USING A THIRD-PARTY APPROACH TO DISCOVER THE WAY PEOPLE
REALLY FEEL
In general, people are reluctant to talk about themselves and how they really
feel about someone or something. However, people are less hesitant to talk
about others, perhaps to avoid revealing too much information about
themselves. You can use this human characteristic to learn some very closely
held (intimate) information about a person of interest. is is achieved by
using the elicitation technique known as internal/external foci.
Here’s an example of how the technique works. Most couples in a
monogamous relationship would like to know if their partner is predisposed to
cheat on them. If you ask your signiﬁcant other if they would, in fact, cheat on
you, rarely will you hear, “Yeah, I don’t have any problem with that.” ey may
be thinking that, but would surely not say it out loud.
To ﬁnd out what your loved one really thinks about cheating, you need to
approach the topic from a third-person perspective. Instead of asking the direct
question, “What do you think about cheating?” you want to say, “My friend
Susan caught her husband cheating. What do you think about that?” When a
person is confronted with a third-party observation, they tend to look inside
themselves to ﬁnd the answer and tell you what they really think.
Of course, the answer you want to hear is “Cheating is wrong. I would
never do that to you.” However, be prepared for answers such as “Everybody
cheats nowadays,” “If a wife can’t take care of her husband’s needs, what else is
a man to do?” “If my wife treated me the same way she treated him, I’d cheat
on her, too,” and “It’s no wonder, they haven’t been getting along lately.”
ese answers tend to reﬂect what a person really thinks about cheating.
e individual in this case tends to think that extramarital aﬀairs are acceptable
under certain conditions, and he or she is therefore predisposed to cheat when
those conditions are met. ese “third-person” responses are not 100 percent
accurate, but they do provide insights into your loved one’s predisposition to
cheat and are much more reﬂective of his or her true feelings than any answer
you might get through direct questions on the issue.
HE’S NOT WORTH THE WEIGHT
A student of mine, Linda, was in a serious relationship with a young man and
contemplating marriage. She struggled with a weight problem and exercised
regularly to keep in shape. However, she knew that she would eventually gain
weight as she aged or if she were to become pregnant. She wanted to know
how her boyfriend would feel if she put on extra pounds. She was concerned
he might have problems with it.
One evening, Linda suggested to her boyfriend that they watch the TV
show e Biggest Loser. e program highlights morbidly obese people who
enter into a program that includes exercise, diet, and lifestyle changes to shed
pounds. e person who loses the most weight by the end of the show wins a
large prize. Halfway through the show, her boyfriend blurted out, “If my wife
ever got like that, I’d kick her to the curb.”
Linda’s concerns appeared justiﬁed. Her boyfriend was commenting from a
third-person perspective, so he revealed his true feelings. She tested him by
asking the direct question, “If I ever became overweight, would you kick me to
the curb?” Predictably, her boyfriend replied, “No, honey, I’d love you no
matter how much you weighed.”
But by using the internal/external foci elicitation technique, she found out
how he really felt. She eventually broke up with him.
If you have children, you can use the internal/external elicitation technique
to probe their feelings about sensitive issues. For instance, let’s say you want to
know if your kids are using drugs. If you asked them the direct question, “Are
you using drugs?” they would frame their answer within social norms and
answer, “No, of course not, drugs are bad.”
e best way to ﬁnd out how your children really feel about drugs is to ask
them from a third-party perspective. For example, “My friend’s son got caught
in school with marijuana. What’s your take on that?” You want to hear
“Marijuana is bad and I would never use it.” However, be prepared for “at’s
stupid. He should have never brought it to school,” “It’s only weed,” or “No
big deal. I know lots of kids who smoke marijuana.” ese responses indicate
that your kid may be using marijuana or is predisposed to experimentation.
Again, these responses are not foolproof evidence of drug use by your child,
but they do provide insights into your child’s predisposition.
RULE #4: EMPATHIZE: USE EMPATHIC STATEMENTS AND OTHER VERBAL
OBSERVATIONS THAT MAKE YOUR LISTENER(S) AWARE THAT YOU KNOW
HOW THEY FEEL.
People develop positive feelings toward those individuals who can “walk in
their shoes” and understand what they are experiencing. Your empathic
statements and/or statements of concern send a message to the listener that
you comprehend their circumstances and realize what they have to say is
meaningful. In doing so, you are fulﬁlling the other person’s need to be
recognized and appreciated. is makes them feel better about themselves and
in turn makes them feel better about you, which encourages friendship
development.
You’ll be amazed at how often you will get the chance to use empathic
statements to start conversations and jump-start getting people to like you. All
it takes is a willingness to observe people for a few moments before you speak
to them. What you will see, more often than you might expect, is the
individual you are watching saying or doing something that reveals they are
dissatisﬁed with the current situation they are in. is is especially true when
you are dealing with individuals whom you might only confront once, or at
infrequent intervals, during your life, such as salespeople, clerks, service
personnel, and the like.
You can be almost certain, for example, that if you eat out at a restaurant
during prime dinner hours, your server will be rushed. Simply saying, “Boy,
you look busy!” will usually bring an aﬃrmative response and, along with it,
superior service. e individual you spoke with appreciates that you noticed
them and recognized the work challenge they face. It makes them feel better
about themselves and, based on the Golden Rule of Friendship, they are going
to like you for what you did. If you want to be even more empathic, add a
compliment to your original statement that allows them to ﬂatter themselves.
“Boy, you’re really busy! I don’t know how you do it.” Or: “Boy, you’re busy!
ere’s no way I could keep up with all those orders.”
ere are times that you don’t need to witness a person of interest’s
discomfort or complaints to make eﬀective empathic comments. is happens
when you can infer that a person might be experiencing diﬃculties and would
appreciate recognition of their plight. To illustrate: If it is late in the day and
you see a woman clerk in high heels working the ﬂoor in a department store,
you might comment, “Wow, your feet must get tired with you having to stand
up at work all day.” Chances are you’re going to be right and the salesperson
will respond positively to your empathetic behavior.
Parents can eﬀectively use empathic statements when they want to
encourage their children to talk to them, especially when they are teenagers.
Most teenagers are reluctant to openly share information and experiences with
their parents, for a wide variety of reasons. Demanding, threatening, or
cajoling a response typically ends in a shields-up reaction, causing the teen to
become more resolute in their determination not to talk with you.
To avoid this nonproductive response, use an empathic statement such as
“You look like you are thinking about something pretty serious,” “You look as
though something is really bothering you,” or “You’re worried about
something.” Your teen might respond in several ways. First, they could agree
with you and disclose what is on his or her mind. Second, they could provide a
partial response. In this event, construct another empathic statement to tease
out a few more details. Most teens want to tell their parents what’s bothering
them. ey just need a little encouragement and the belief that talking to you
is their choice. e third response is a curt reply and silence. In this instance,
the applicable empathic statement could be something to the eﬀect of
“Something’s bothering you and you don’t want to talk about it right now.
When you feel the time is right, let me know and we can talk.”
Showing empathy toward another person, whether it is done through
empathic statements or other forms of verbal commentary, is a powerful way
to make another person feel better about themselves and make them your
friend at the same time. In your friendship toolbox, the empathy tool will be
one of your most often used and eﬀective techniques for shaping successful
relationships. What you say and how you listen will go a long way in
establishing or destroying friendships.
AVOIDING CONVERSATION PITFALLS
Getting people to like you, as we have seen, can be facilitated by encouraging
them to talk about themselves while you listen to what they say and using that
information to choose and use your various friendship tools to cement the
relationship. For this reason, the last thing you want to do is discourage (usually
unintentionally) the two-way ﬂow of communication between yourself and the
person who you hope will perceive you as a friend. To keep the
communication ﬂowing smoothly, be sure to steer clear of common
conversation pitfalls that impede verbal exchanges between individuals.
1. Avoid talking about topics that engender negative feelings in your listener. Negative feelings
make people feel bad about themselves and, consequently, they will like you less.
2. Don’t constantly complain about your problems, your family’s problems, or the problems of
the world. People have enough problems of their own without hearing about yours . . . or
anyone else’s for that matter.
3. Avoid talking excessively about yourself. Talking about yourself too much bores other people.
Keep the focus on the other person in your conversation.
4. Do not engage in meaningless chatter; it turns people (and the Like Switch) oﬀ.
5. Avoid expressing too little or too much emotion. Extreme displays of emotion may put you in
a bad light.
PUTTING IT ALL TOGETHER
Verbal behavior is a vital component in activating the Like Switch and keeping
it lit. What you say, how you listen, and how you respond to what you hear
plays a huge role in determining how successful you will be in making friends
and learning information without appearing intrusive. Using the tools in this
chapter will help you achieve success in speaking the language of friendship.
You have my word on that!
6
BUILDING CLOSENESS
e loftiest ediﬁces need the deepest foundations.
—GEORGE SANTAYANA
Making friends requires a particular bonding agent to hold the relationship
together: rapport. When you “connect” with another person you have rapport.
It is the ground from which the relationships grows. As noted writer and
speaker Kevin Hogan observed, “Building rapport begins with you.” If you
want to make friends, it is your responsibility to establish rapport and then, if
you want to continue beyond a brief encounter, to strengthen that rapport to
expand the relationship into a cohesive, long-lasting bond.
is chapter has all the tools you need to establish and build rapport, but
ﬁrst let’s return for a moment to the friend-foe continuum.
FRIEND–STRANGER–FOE
e friend-foe continuum makes no distinction in the levels of friendship that
are possible between not knowing anyone at all (stranger) and the friend end of
the continuum. Obviously, such diﬀerences exist and these diﬀerences in turn
dictate how rapport should be developed in our personal encounters. ese
diﬀerent levels of friendship are depicted in the following:
STRANGER–CASUAL ENCOUNTER–ACQUAINTANCE–FRIEND–SIGNIFICANT
OTHER
Looking at this “friendship continuum,” you can see that the level of contacts
increases in signiﬁcance, moving from a brief, infrequent interaction to a
potentially lifelong relationship. Building rapport becomes more important as
we evolve along the continuum from the “casual encounter” to the “signiﬁcant
other.” is is because the interaction becomes more intense and meaningful as
people who were once strangers become an increasingly integral part of each
other’s lives.
is chapter is designed to help you understand how and whether you are
eﬀectively building closeness with persons of interest.
BUILDING RAPPORT
People are communal beings. We naturally seek to connect to other people.
Rapport builds a psychological bridge between people and paves the way for
various levels of friendship to develop. If I can build rapport with you I can be
relatively certain you will like me. It’s that simple.
When I interviewed witnesses and suspects, my ﬁrst task was to build a
psychological connection between myself and the person I was interviewing.
People, especially suspects, rarely open up to people they don’t like. In the case
with suspects, I am asking that person to reveal secrets that would put him or
her in prison for a long time. On one occasion, I interviewed a repeat sexual
assault suspect. We connected on the topic of sports. Once the rapport bridge
was established, I was able to delve deeper into his personal life. Eventually, the
suspect confessed his crimes. e suspect voluntarily maintained his
connection with me long after his trial, conviction, and sentencing through a
series of unanswered letters he sent me. In the letters he thanked me for being
his friend and treating him with respect. Treating the suspect with respect is
possible; being his friend was an illusion; nonetheless, his letters provide a
testament of the power of connecting with other people.
TESTING FOR RAPPORT
Testing for rapport is important in any personal interaction because it lets us
know “how we are doing” and “where we stand” in developing a relationship
with any given individual. Even in a onetime encounter with someone,
particularly if we want something from them, testing for rapport is important
to determine when and if we have reached a point in the relationship where we
can attempt to achieve our relationship objectives. at being said, testing for
rapport reaches its most signiﬁcant level of importance when we are interested
in developing closer, more enduring relationships over time.
Sometimes there is an overlap between the behaviors we use to build
rapport and the behaviors we use to test for rapport. In these cases, the degree
and intensity of the behaviors vary as personal relationships strengthen or
weaken and provide us with an objective measure of a deepening or dying
relationship. For example, eye gaze is a way to build rapport. e length of that
gaze is used to test for rapport, providing a measure of how far the relationship
has developed or deteriorated. What follows are some of the important
behaviors that can be used to test for the foundation of friendships between
individuals.
TOUCHING
Touching represents a reliable gauge to measure the intensity of a relationship.
When strangers meet, they typically touch one another on the arms below the
shoulders or on the hands, as was discussed earlier in the book. Any touching
that occurs outside this public touch zone suggests a more intense relationship.
Women who feel comfortable with the person they are talking to will often
reach out and give the other person a light touch on the forearm or knee if
they are both seated. is light touch indicates that rapport has been
established.
Men often mistake a light touch to the forearm or knee as an invitation to
have sex. is is rarely the case. Men, more so than women, tend to interpret
nonverbal gestures signaling good rapport as a sexual oﬀer. When a woman
gives a man a light touch, the only safe assumption he can make is that she
likes him, and nothing more. is male tendency to assume a woman’s touch is
a sexual invitation often damages budding relationships, often beyond repair.
e most intimate (nonsexual) place a man can touch a woman in public is
the small of her back. is place is reserved for men who have earned the right
to make an intimate public display of aﬀection. Touching the small of a
woman’s back can also serve as a relationship indicator. If, for example, you see
a woman you’d like to meet speaking with another man, you can test the
strength of their relationship by observing the actions of the man as you
approach. If the man extends his arm and hovers over the small of the woman’s
back, he is staking his claim, but he has not yet earned the right to invade the
woman’s personal space. is gesture means that you still have a chance to gain
her aﬀection without interfering with an ongoing, committed relationship.
If a man attempts to prematurely touch the small of a woman’s back, she
will often ﬂinch and show nonverbal signs of discomfort, or a combination
thereof. On the other hand, if, as you approach, the man ﬁrmly touches the
small of the woman’s lower back or hip region, you should assume that the
relationship has progressed well beyond the introductory stage and you should
look elsewhere for companionship.
An intimate touch.
Staking a claim, but not a sexual touch.
THE SPY WHO WAS TAKEN ABACK
Touching the small of the back provided a critical clue in an espionage case
against an FBI agent who, it turned out, provided classiﬁed information to a
foreign government for over twenty years. is agent recruited a source from a
country hostile to the United States. Over the period of their relationship, the
source convinced the agent to provide classiﬁed information that was
eventually passed on to the hostile foreign government.
e members of the Behavioral Analysis Program obtained a series of
videotapes depicting the agent interacting with his source. On one of the tapes,
he was observed touching his source on the small of her back. Based on this
gesture, the BAP team was able to determine that on or before that date the
FBI agent had engaged in sex with his source. A possible motive was detected
for the agent to knowingly provide classiﬁed information to a hostile
government. is led to an investigation that uncovered his complicity in the
illegal transmission of classiﬁed documents to a foreign government.
PREENING (“GROOMING”) BEHAVIORS
Preening gestures such as picking lint oﬀ a partner’s clothes or straightening his
tie or coat are also signs of good rapport. Self-preening, on the other hand,
particularly when it is done to avoid looking at the other person or carried on
over an extended period of time, is often a foe signal indicating lack of interest
in the relationship.
Researchers identiﬁed a list of grooming behaviors that can be used to assess
the intensity of romantic relationships. e more grooming behaviors that are
present, the more intense the relationship. is checklist is a good way to assess
your romantic relationships. Holly Nelson and Glen Geher developed the
following partial list of positive grooming activities.
1. Do you run your ﬁngers through your signiﬁcant other’s hair?
2. Do you wash your signiﬁcant other’s hair or body while  showering/bathing?
3. Do you shave your signiﬁcant other’s legs/face?
4. Do you wipe away your signiﬁcant other’s tears when he or she cries?
5. Do you brush or play with your signiﬁcant other’s hair?
6. Do you wipe away or dry liquid spills oﬀ your signiﬁcant other?
7. Do you clean and/or trim your signiﬁcant other’s ﬁngernails or toenails?
8. Do you brush dirt, leaves, lint, bugs, etc. oﬀ your signiﬁcant other?
9. Do you scratch your signiﬁcant other’s back or other body parts?
10. Do you wipe food and/or crumbs oﬀ your signiﬁcant other’s face or body?
Getting “groomed” is a sign of good rapport.
ISOPRAXISM (MIRRORING THE BEHAVIOR OF ANOTHER PERSON)
We discussed isopraxism/mirroring to build rapport in Chapter 2. So, how do
you test for it? By checking for its presence over time through what is referred
to as the “lead and follow” approach.
Examples of good rapport (top photo, mirroring clearly visible) and poor rapport (bottom photo, asynchronous
posture and no mirroring in evidence).
People who are psychologically connected mirror one another’s body
gestures. Intentionally mirroring another individual’s body language promotes
rapport. When you ﬁrst meet someone, you’ll want to mirror his or her
gestures to establish rapport. At some point during the conversation, you can
test your rapport with the other person by using the lead-and-follow
technique. Heretofore, you have been mirroring the other person. Now you
want to see if they mirror your gestures, signaling rapport. Change your body
position. If you have established rapport, the other person should mirror you
within twenty to thirty seconds.
In the lead-and-follow approach to testing for rapport, you are changing
your body position by crossing or uncrossing your arms and legs or making
some other obvious change in your posture. If the other person mirrors the
same gesture, rapport has been established. However, if the other person does
not respond in like kind, then you have the option of continuing to build
rapport, followed by a new lead-and-follow test to see if rapport has been
established after your additional eﬀorts have been expended.
HAIR FLIP
A head toss accompanied by a momentary ﬂip of the hair with the hand is an
indicator of rapport.
e key nonverbal display during a hair ﬂip is mutual gaze, which is a
strong positive sign that rapport has been established. e three pictures that
follow show a “hair ﬂip” in sequence, as it would actually appear in real time.
Observe the hair ﬂip carefully when testing for rapport. is is because a
hair ﬂip, without mutual gaze, that is, a hair ﬂip accompanied by broken eye
contact, is a strong negative signal indicating a lack of rapport. is gesture is
commonly referred to as a “bitch ﬂip.”
A hair ﬂip
The bitch ﬂip
The hair ﬂip sequence
POSTURAL POSITIONING
A good way to test for rapport is to note the posture of the two individuals
who are interacting. Two behaviors are of particular value.
INWARD LEANING
Individuals lean toward people or things they like and distance themselves
from those they don’t. People who are in good rapport lean toward one
another. During predeployment training for interrogators going to Iraq, I
noticed that the majority of the soldiers were leaning backward during the ﬁrst
hour of my presentation. Just prior to the break, using an empathic statement,
I told them I didn’t feel as though I was making a connection with them. e
soldiers nodded in unison. ey told me they had been to Iraq on two
previous deployments and the material I was teaching them was too basic. I
told them to take a ﬁfteen-minute break and I would go to my oﬃce to
retrieve the advanced training manual. Had I not noticed the lack of rapport
between myself and the class during the ﬁrst hour, the entire training session
would have been wasted.
OPEN POSTURE
People who are in good rapport assume an open body posture. An open
posture signals attraction and openness to communication. It consists of
gestures that include uncrossed legs and arms, a high rate of hand movements
during speech, palms-up displays, a slight forward lean, and the display of
friend signals. is communicates warmth, trust, and friendliness. To add to
the impact of open posture, one can use head nodding, head tilts, and verbal
encouragers such as “I see,” “Uh-huh,” or “Go on.”
A person experiencing good rapport does not feel threatened by the person
with whom they are interacting and therefore is comfortable assuming an open
posture. An individual who feels threatened in the same situation tends to
assume a closed body posture to protect himself from a threat or perceived
threat. A closed posture can also indicate a lack of interest.
Closed posture displays are typically the opposite of open posture displays.
ese include tightly crossed arms, a low rate of hand movements, and few
friend signals. If the person you are talking with is looking at you but their
torso and feet are pointing in another direction, he or she is not fully engaged.
A person’s feet will often point in another direction to subconsciously telegraph
a desire to leave. Other signs of disinterest are backward leaning of the body or
head, supporting the head with the hands, or negative grooming behaviors
such as picking at teeth or nails.
TORSO REPOSITIONING
People who share rapport will orient themselves toward each other. Leaning in
or away from someone is one form of torso shift indicating good or poor
rapport. Another type of torso shift is illustrated in the two photographs on
the following page. is type of nonverbal body movement involves shifting
the torso so it faces the person of interest more directly. Such a body shift is a
good indication of increasing rapport between the individuals involved.
In testing for rapport using torso movements, the basic rule to remember is
that people who share rapport will orient their bodies toward each other. is
is the typical sequence for achieving such an orientation: First, the other
person’s head will turn toward you. Second, the other person’s shoulders will
turn toward you. Finally, the other person will reposition his or her torso so
that it directly faces you. When this occurs, you can be conﬁdent that rapport
has been established.
Torso repositioning sequence
BARRIERS
A good way to test for rapport is to look for barriers that individuals place
and/or remove between themselves and other people. People who do not feel
comfortable with other individuals will erect barriers or leave ones already
there in place. On the other hand, individuals who feel at ease with the person
with whom they are interacting will keep an open space between them, even if
it involves removing barriers that are already between them.
Attempts to block the body or chest are a foe signal. You can send this
nonverbal message at the dinner table by placing or leaving a centerpiece
between yourself and the individual sitting across from you.
Barriers can be formed by the positioning of hands and feet or placing an
inanimate object between individuals. Some of the nonverbal behaviors and
inanimate objects that create barriers are listed below. When you see these
kinds of barriers, you can assume that good rapport has not been established
between the individuals involved.
Arm crossing provides a barrier. (The backward lean demonstrates a lack of rapport.)
ARM CROSSING
Arm crossing serves as a psychological barrier to protect individuals from
topics that cause them psychological anxiety. People who are in good rapport
do not feel threatened, nor do they feel anxious. If the person you are talking
to suddenly crosses his or her arms, then rapport has not yet been established
or it signals weakening rapport. People who feel uncomfortable with the
person they are talking to or the topic being discussed tend to cross their arms
over their chest.
BUILDING BARRIERS WITH INANIMATE OBJECTS
e placement of soft drink cans, pillows, purses, and other movable objects
between you and another person signals discomfort and a lack of rapport. A
woman who does not have good rapport with the person she is talking with
will often use her purse to create a barrier. is usually involves picking up her
purse from the ﬂoor and bringing it to her lap. is signals that rapport has
not yet been established or that the rapport is deteriorating.
PILLOW TALK
I explained the function of barriers to a new agent I was training. He was a
little skeptical about the eﬀectiveness of the technique until he interviewed a
particular witness. We interviewed the witness at her home. She sat on the
couch and we sat in two wing-backed chairs across from her. e new agent
asked the witness to provide a description of the suspect. e witness hesitated,
reached for a couch pillow, and placed it on her lap. e new agent gave me a
sideward glance to let me know that he had picked up on the nonverbal tell
that the witness was uncomfortable describing the suspect. e new agent
constructed an empathic statement. “Ma’am, you seem to be uncomfortable
about identifying the suspect.” “I sure am,” she admitted. “I don’t want that
guy coming back and hurting me.” e agent constructed a follow-up
empathic statement: “So, you’re worried about retribution.” “Yeah,” she sighed.
A change in the witness’s nonverbal language signaled a change in her
psychological disposition. Watching for subtle changes in people’s nonverbal
language often communicates more information than anything the person
might say.
e agent took the time to discuss the woman’s fear and gave her reasons
that her fear was unfounded. Once he was able to eliminate the witness’s fear
of retaliation, not surprisingly, she returned the couch pillow to the corner of
the couch. e connection between the new agent and the witness had been
reestablished.
PROLONGED EYE CLOSURE
Anxious people will signify their uneasiness by prolonged eye closure. eir
eyelids serve as a barrier to prevent them from seeing the person or thing that
makes them anxious or uncomfortable. On several occasions when I entered
my boss’s oﬃce I saw him close his eyelids for one to two seconds. is display
let me know that he was busy and did not want to talk to me at that time. My
boss and I generally shared good rapport, but on those days when he displayed
prolonged eye closure, I quickly excused myself. My boss would not welcome
my requests, comments, or suggestions when his nonverbal behavior indicated
he wanted to be left alone.
EYE-BLINK RATE
When people experience anxiety, they tend to increase their eye-blink rate. e
normal rate for most people is ﬁfteen blinks per minute. As people become
more anxious, their rate increases or decreases from their normal baseline rate.
Each person has a slightly diﬀerent “normal” eye blink rate and thus their
personal rate must be calibrated at the beginning of your interaction with
them.
CUP POSITIONING
As you may recall, 70 percent of all information is transferred between
individuals over food and drink. People who eat or drink together are
predisposed to talk. Watching where a person places his or her cup can signal if
rapport has been established. If the person across from you places his or her
cup between the two of you, the cup forms a barrier, which signals that rapport
has not yet been established. If the person places it to either side, leaving open
the space between the two of you, this signals that rapport has been
established. e three pictures that follow show a couple developing good
rapport.
Cup movement helps you determine if rapport has been established.
Note in the ﬁrst photo how the two cups form a barrier between the couple
at the table. In the second photo, the young lady is about to take a drink, while
the young man has already sipped from his cup. In the third snapshot, the
woman has ﬁnished her drink and placed it to one side, leaving an open space
between herself and the young man, who is still holding his cup but is clearly
about to place it on the other side of the table to clear the space between them
of any barriers.
Barrier-removing behaviors between you and the person you are talking to
signal good rapport. You can monitor rapport during conversations by
watching where people place their cups or other objects on the table. If the
person you are talking to unexpectedly places their cup in front of you, then
this gesture could signal weakening rapport. In other words, cup or object
positioning can serve as a barometer of rapport to signal whether it is
dissipating or increasing. is is seen in the series of photos that follows on
page 180.
In the ﬁrst photo, we see a couple seated at a table with a vase of ﬂowers
between them. In the next two photos, we see the young man removing the
barrier (ﬂowers) between himself and the young lady by picking up the vase
and placing it on the side. e fourth photo shows increasing rapport with no
barrier, and the young couple leaning in toward each other, displaying head
tilts and smiling. e ﬁfth picture displays still stronger rapport, as the male
and female are now holding hands. e sixth picture captures the strongest
rapport of all, as the young man is whispering to his companion, whispering
being another strong sign of good rapport.


he buildup of good rapport over time
BEHAVIORS THAT INDICATE THE PRESENCE OR ABSENCE OF RAPPORT
Here are some of the “tells” you will want to watch for in determining where you are in the rapport-building process.
Friend Signals Signifying Rapport Foe Signals Signifying a Lack of Rapport
Eyebrow ﬂashes Furrowed eyebrows
Head tilt Eye rolls
Frequent smiles Cold stares
Mutual gaze Prolonged eye closure and/or gaze aversion
Intimate touching No (or very limited) touching
Isopraxism (mirroring behavior) Asynchronous posture
Inward lean (toward another person) Leaning away (from another person)
Whispering Hair twirling (unless a “habit”)
Expressive gestures Aggressive stance and/or attack posture
Open body posture Closed body posture
Removal of barriers/obstacles Creation or use of barriers/obstacles
Wide-open eyes Eye squints
Puckering or licking of lips (women) Fake yawns
Frequent nods Negative head shakes
Sharing food (“food forking”) Scrunched nose
Preening (“grooming”) your partner Self-preening
Hair ﬂip Bitch ﬂip
WHAT DO YOU SEE? TIME TO TAKE A TEST ON WHAT YOU’VE LEARNED!
On the following pages are a series of photographs, each one accompanied by a
question. Using the information you have learned in this book, answer the
question to the best of your ability. en check your responses against our
answers found in the Appendix.
Identify the friend or foe signal depicted in the photograph.
Identify three friend signals depicted in the photograph.
(Difﬁcult question): Identify (name) an additional friend signal not found in picture #2.
How good is the rapport between the individuals in this photograph? Using nonverbal behavioral cues, justify your
answer.
How would you describe the way these individuals feel about each other? Use nonverbal cues to support your answer.
How would you describe the way these individuals feel about each other? Use nonverbal cues to support your answer.
Can you identify the friend signal not seen in any of the other photos that indicates good rapport between the two
individuals?
How would you describe the way these individuals feel about each other? Use nonverbal cues to support your answer.
How would you describe the level of rapport between the two individuals in the photo? Use nonverbal cues to justify
your answer.
(Difﬁcult question): Who has the upper hand here, the guy or the gal? Use nonverbal cues to explain and justify your
answer.
7
NURTURING AND SUSTAINING LONG- TERM
RELATIONSHIPS
People don’t care about how much you know until they ﬁrst know how much you care.
—ZIG ZIGLAR
All long-term relationships start out as short-term relationships and develop
the same way as all friendships do, through an understanding and utilization of
all the tools for building and sustaining rapport. As time passes, some of our
relationships grow from friendship to romantic. When a relationship has
matured to being a loving interaction, a new behavioral focus is required to
keep the passion and the partnership intact and intense.
is behavior, simple to understand but challenging to sustain, is caring.
ink for a moment of every person you have known on more than a casual
basis, such as family, friends, colleagues, and mentors. en ask yourself:
“Which of these individuals would I hold in highest esteem and carry out their
wishes most willingly?” Chances are that person is someone who you believe
cares about you. You sense this in their actions and in their general demeanor.
Trying to deﬁne caring is a bit like deﬁning the term pornography. When a
Supreme Court justice was asked to deﬁne that term he answered, “I can’t
deﬁne it, but I can recognize it when I see it.” So, too, with caring. To try to
use words to capture the essence of caring leaves us struggling to recognize the
emotional, deeply passionate component of what caring is all about, even
though we can readily recognize it when we experience it. Caring is about the
heart rather than the head. It is about a relationship that goes beyond robotic,
intellectual, surface interactions and taps into the very essence of who we are at
our innermost level of feeling.
Caring allows us to reach the higher elevations of relationship growth, and
the letters that spell out the word also tell us what we need to do to care
eﬀectively.
C = Compassion/concern
A = Active listening
R = Reinforcement
E = Empathy
Let’s examine each of these words in turn to help deﬁne what must be done
to keep long-term relationships with signiﬁcant others healthy and happy.
COMPASSION/CONCERN
People who are caring individuals show an honest concern for others. Not a
passing comment or a ﬂippant response to someone who is hurting, but rather
a genuine sense of compassion for what that person is experiencing and a
commitment to help make things better. In long-term relationships there will
be many times when one or both partners are facing crises. It is here where the
true level of concern, or lack of it, becomes evident. It is relatively easy to
maintain a long-term relationship when things are going well; it is in the
crucible of a crisis that the true character of an individual is revealed and found
to be wonderful or wanting.
In a sense, there is little one can imagine that is more beautiful than two
people who have come to depend on each other to be there as a caring partner
when the need arises, as it most certainly will. Perhaps the most enduring form
of caring comes when one person becomes a caregiver for a sick or injured
partner. To witness this kind of selﬂess sacriﬁce, day after day, sometimes year
after year, is to see the embodiment of caring in its purest form.
Hopefully, you will never be called upon to care for a signiﬁcant other in
sickness (rather than in health). Fortunately, on a daily basis you can do little
things that let your partner know you care about them. Sharing the workload,
doing something extra special for no reason, taking the time to give a
compliment to your “special person,” oﬀering reassurance when they falter,
being there when they need you, oﬀering a kind word and a helping hand:
ese are all acts of caring that a compassionate individual undertakes. is
kind of caring is “loving someone from the inside,” and when you give it from
your heart it will be received with heartfelt gratitude.
I was sitting in a crowded Washington, D.C., shopping mall food court
having lunch and as I was walking to the trash receptacle, I thought I heard my
name being called. I scanned the crowd and didn’t notice anyone trying to get
my attention so I continued walking. I then heard my full name being called. I
turned and saw a young lady approaching. She stopped and introduced herself,
but I didn’t recognize her. She told me that she wanted to thank me for saving
her life. I gave her a quizzical look. She continued, “I was one of the girls who
was kidnapped about ten years ago.” Instantly, I ﬂashed back to the day she
and her friend were rescued by two police oﬃcers in a hail of gunﬁre. I
reminded her that the two police oﬃcers were the ones who saved her life. She
acknowledged that the oﬃcers rescued her from her kidnapper, but I was the
one who saved her life. “How so?” I asked.
“I was an emotional wreck,” she said. “Your kindness and compassion got
me started on the healing process.” I recalled being assigned to the case. My
supervisor tasked me to interview her after she was freed. It took about a
month to get her calmed down enough to tell me what happened without
breaking down. I spent about an hour each day just letting her talk things out.
Empathic statements were crucial. We rarely discussed the actual kidnapping
event but, eventually, I was able to conduct a detailed interview of the then-
fourteen-year-old victim . I completed the interview and never saw her again,
nor did I give her another thought, but she remembered. “You may have
forgotten me,” she said, “but I will always remember your acts of kindness. I
don’t think I would have recovered without your help.” I thanked her and told
her that I was just doing my job. I put my tray on the service counter and we
parted. I realized then that words spoken, which are often long forgotten by
the speaker, can continue to have a profound impact on the listener.
ACTIVE LISTENING
Active listening means you are using verbal and nonverbal cues along with
empathic statements when the other person is speaking. Some of the earlier
suggestions in Chapter 5 involving active listening take on added signiﬁcance
in long-term relationships, where years of inter active communication with the
same individual can give us a better understanding of how to strengthen or
weaken personal bonds.
In long-term relationships, communication is a key element in sustaining or
draining the feelings we have toward one another. Open, honest interchanges
between long-term partners build trust, demonstrate a caring attitude, and
provide vital information about the on going health of the relationship.
If, from the start of any relationship, you have been a proponent and
practitio ner of active listening, you will have a great advantage the longer the
relationship lasts. is is because you will have a far better understanding of
your partner’s particular needs, personal “quirks,” interests, personality, desires,
fears, and which conversational topics are to be explored or avoided.
Without active listening, it is possible for some couples who have been
together for decades to have literally no idea how their partner really feels or
what they want. is is because they haven’t paid attention to what their
partner was saying! As hard as it might be to believe this could happen, it does;
sadly, more often than most people would care to admit. Active listening
allows open, two-way communication, where the give-and-take of information
is facilitated by active speaking and listening.
One of the greatest beneﬁts of active listening in a long-term relationship is
the ability to make ﬁner discriminations concerning how to best care for your
partner. Whereas in a new or early-stage relationship the chance of saying “the
wrong thing” is a distinct possibility, these conversational errors should drop
oﬀ dramatically (even disappear altogether) as the relationship matures and the
parties to the interaction get to know each other better through active
listening.
Any individual who has actively listened to his or her long-term signiﬁcant
other knows full well what word mines to avoid and the hot-button issues that
shouldn’t be pressed. A caring person uses this information to strengthen the
relationship. On the other hand, this knowledge can be used to weaken and
even destroy relationships. is occurs most frequently during ﬁghts when one
party to the argument purposely “pushes” the other person’s hot button,
eﬀectively escalating the conﬂict and inﬂicting mental pain at the same time.
is is a very bad strategy to employ, even if a person is mad or it helps win an
argument. e problem is that long after the argument is over and the reason it
started is forgotten, the emotional aftermath of being hurt by a person’s words
will linger.
Even though it might be tempting to use information you have learned
from previous discussions to win an argument or “get in your licks” during a
ﬁght, don’t do it if your partner considers such information “oﬀ-limits.” Resist
the temptation to lash out with your tongue! Over time, if a person persists in
deliberately tripping word mines, pushing hot-button issues, or bringing up
topics that are considered oﬀ-limits in arguments, the relationship might very
well collapse as a result.
KEEP YOUR VOICE AWAY FROM THE HOT BUTTON!
Be an eﬀective active listener. Not only will you be seen as more caring; you
will also achieve a greater understanding of your partner and strengthen your
relationship in the process. Here are a few additional hints to make your active
listening more eﬀective:
• Let your partner ﬁnish what they are saying before you begin talking.
• Important discussions deserve an appropriate setting where you can easily hear what your
partner is saying (don’t talk about ﬁnances or life-changing events in a noisy, crowded
restaurant!).
• Don’t be thinking of what you’ll be saying while your partner is talking; focus on their words,
not your thoughts.
• If your partner is introverted and ﬁnds it uncomfortable to speak, encourage them with head
nods and verbal nudges (see Chapter 5).
• Observe your partner while they speak. Communication is nonverbal as well as verbal. Also, by
paying attention to your partner they are most likely to see you as sincerely interested in what
they have to say.
• Be prepared to compliment your partner when they make a good point or suggestion.
• When you hear something you don’t like or agree with, don’t automatically dismiss the
comment or go on the oﬀensive. Give the observation some thought and see if there might be
some truth in what was said or, at least, some room for reaching a compromise that is
satisfactory to both partners.
• If your partner is clearly wrong in a given situation, try to help them ﬁnd a face-saving way to
gracefully own up to their error.
• You can even suggest a “time-out” if you feel the conversation is becoming confrontational.
REINFORCEMENT
Reinforcement is the use of reward and punishment meted out by one
individual to another in a relationship. Here are some errors you don’t want to
make in dealing with your signiﬁcant other:
1. Being Unaware at Your Style of Interaction Leads to the Inappropriate Administration of
Rewards and/or Punishments to Others on a Day-to-Day Basis.
Some people, when involved in a long-term relationship, exhibit consistent
patterns of reinforcement with their partner that are not conducive to
maximizing relationship satisfaction. ere are three kinds of individuals who
use reinforcement inappropriately.
The Negativistic Partner
eir motto: “Emphasize the negative; ignore the positive.”
eir credo: “What credit do you deserve for doing something right? at’s your job!”
eir behavioral approach to a partner: negativity and punishment.
Negativistic partners seem to have mastered the “See, I told you so” routine
when you’re wrong and the “I don’t see you” routine when you’re right. e
person living with a negativistic partner usually utters this oft-heard lament:
“e only time I hear from my partner is when I do something wrong.” Is it
any wonder such behavior creates bitterness and a sense of frustration? Nobody
likes to feel that when they do something good, it is ignored, while any
mistakes receive maximum attention. As one wife so aptly told her husband,
“At least if you’re going to criticize my mistakes, give equal time to my
successes.” Negativistic partners need to recognize that it is appropriate to
criticiz e their signiﬁcant other if they do something wrong that needs
correcting; however, it is also appropriate to praise that individual when they
do something well.
The Perfectionistic Partner
eir motto: “ere’s always room for improvement.”
eir credo: “If it isn’t perfect; it isn’t worth it.”
eir behavioral approach to a partner: sets unreasonable standards.
e perfectionistic partner demands high levels of eﬀort to achieve
perfection when competency will suﬃce with far less eﬀort expended.
Perfectionistic individuals aren’t unwilling to praise their partners for a task or
chore well done, as long as it is done perfectly. And therein lies the problem.
Because the perfectionistic partner sets standards so high, hardly anybody can
reach the level of performance necessary to trigger a kind word. us the
perfectionistic partner does the negativistic partner one better, requiring such
high levels of performance it is literally impossible to satisfy them in the ﬁrst
place! e most successful way perfectionistic partners can modify their over-
the-top demands in a relationship is to temper their standards to a reasonable
level, one that values competency and doesn’t demand behavioral performance
that is largely beyond reach. Perfectionistic partners should come to
understand that the amount of time and eﬀort needed to turn competent
performance into perfect performance is seldom worth it.
The Sadistic Partner
eir motto: “One mistake wipes out all good performance.”
eir credo: “To err is human; to pay for it, divine.”
eir behavioral approach: a total imbalance between the rewarding of good performance versus
the punishment of errors or mistakes.
Sadistic partners earn their title because they remind us of naughty children
who pick the wings oﬀ butterﬂies. On the surface, they seem kind enough.
ey give praise and recognition to their partners on a regular basis. But, wait!
ese individuals have a unique, and unrealistic, way of balancing their
compliments and criticis m when it comes to dealing with their partners. Here’s
how they operate: eir partners can accumulate as many compliments as their
behaviors warrant, but if they do something wrong along the way, that one
mistake “wipes out” all or most of the praise earned along the way. To the
sadistic partner who wants to change for the better, you must recognize a level
of “equity” between the weighing of good versus not-so-good behavior on the
part of your signiﬁcant other, and a recognition that accumulated incidents of
positive behavior should not be rendered worthless because of one negative
incident.
2. Not Paying Enough “Positive Attention” to Your Partner.
One of the unfortunate realities of long-term relationships is the natural
tendency for partners to lose some of the passion that drove them to shower
each other with attention, compliments, and “little acts of aﬀection” during
the early stages of their interaction. is is unfortunate, because human beings
never outgrow the need for positive attention. e sense that someone close to
them appreciates them and is willing to show it by performing small acts of
kindness and oﬀering compliments on a regular basis is critical to the health
and robustness of long-term relationships.
Here are some ways you can give your partner that special feeling of being
appreciated:
• Praise your partner when they do something well. It could be a problem they solved at work.
Possibly, it could involve some civic or social honor they achieved. It might even be nothing
more than they took the time to get you your special dessert at the bakery on the way home.
Let your partner know you appreciate them by praising them. e praise should never be
oﬀered to “get something” from the person being praised. It should be given only when it is
deserved and you can give it honestly. e good news is praise doesn’t cost money. All it takes is
a willingness to observe your partner so you can spot the praiseworthy behavior when it occurs
and then the eﬀort required to actually voice your positive attention.
• Don’t forget a partner’s signiﬁcant milestones such as birthdays, anniversaries, special events,
and so forth. It is remarkable what a store-bought card with a personal message included can
do to make a partner feel really good about themselves and, based on the Golden Rule of
Friendship, feel good about you as well.
• Encourage your partner to participate in decision making, particularly major decisions that
aﬀect both of you. at means including your partner in ﬁnancial planning, large purchase
decisions, occupational changes or moves, and health issues. People are more willing to go
along with whatever decision is reached in a matter if they feel they have had some say in what
is decided. is is because they feel included and have “ownership” of the idea. Not only will
they be more likely to concur and go along with a decision when they have been consulted, but
also they will do so in a more motivated, enthusiastic  manner.
• When appropriate, give “public recognition” to your partner by letting others know what
special accomplishment he or she has achieved. Although your partner might “act”
embarrassed or downplay what they have accomplished when you point this out to others
when they are present, this shouldn’t deter you in most cases. Even introverts will be amenable
to public recognition as long as it is done tastefully and not in too ﬂamboyant a style.
3. Not Rewarding Your Partner Correctly Because What You ink ey Want and What ey
Actually Want Do Not Coincide
Remember back to a holiday or birthday when, as a child, you received a
gift you really didn’t want. It was even worse if the gift came from the one
relative or friend that had the most money to spend and you were depending
on them for that new bike or wad of cash, and instead wound up with a suit or
a set of encyclopedias.
Don’t make this kind of mistake with your partner. Even if you are well-
intentioned and spend a lot of thought and eﬀort getting your special person
that special gift, it will not be appreciated if it is not something he or she
wanted in the ﬁrst place. One would think that after ten, twenty, or thirty
years or more, partners would have a good idea of what each other wants.
Amazingly, this is not always the case. e husband who buys his wife a
vacuum cleaner for Valentine’s Day is not just the stuﬀ of advertisements and
urban legends; it actually does happen.
What’s the best way to make sure that what you get someone is what he or
she wants? Ask! Or, even better, listen to what they say and you will probably
be able to detect what it is they want. Be observant. An open catalogue on the
kitchen table with an item circled in red ink might provide a clue.
One of the problems with asking a person what they want is you give them
what they desire, but it isn’t a “surprise.” One way around this, particularly
when it comes to giving gifts for holidays, is to have your partner put
suggested pictures of items they would enjoy receiving in a special box. For
instance, it could be an ad for a vacation, or a desired household item or
possibly a menu from a special restaurant. at way, the partner can choose
one of the items from the box and purchase it, and the person receiving the
gift won’t know which one to expect. e element of surprise, although not
total, does add more excitement to gift exchanges.
EMPATHY
Empathy is the ﬁnal component of CARE and a critical component of any
successful long-term relationship. Being able to sense how your partner feels,
and caring about it, is essential to maintaining a good relationship. People who
have been together for a long time have a natural advantage when it comes to
empathizing with their partner. ey have had years to learn even the most
subtle nuances of that individual’s moods, unique needs, and behavioral
idiosyncrasies.
It is amazing what a kind word will do when you sense your partner is
feeling down. Using empathic statements such as “You must really be hurting”
when learning your loved one has suﬀered a setback sends a powerful message
that you were caring enough to pick up on the problem and willing to take the
time to express your concern. “Being there” for a partner who is physically or
psychologically hurting provides great comfort, and such compassion is
remembered and cherished.
Empathy is such an important part of relationships it has been recognized
and extolled for decades as a critical tool in shaping relationships of all kinds:
short term, long term, personal, and business. No less a luminary than Henry
Ford summed it up nicely when he observed: “If there is any one secret of
success it lies in the ability to get the other person’s point of view and see
things from that person’s angle as well as from your own.”
Concern/compassion, Active listening, Reinforcement, and Empathy are the
components of CARE that turn short-term friendships into long-term
relationships, and long-term relationships into all they are capable of
becoming.
HOW TO DEAL WITH ANGRY PEOPLE (INCLUDING YOURSELF):
PRACTICING ANGER MANAGEMENT
e tools you have been provided to carve out satisfying short and long-term
relationships are designed to work with almost anyone (no, psychopaths are
not included!). is doesn’t mean that any given relationship will be totally
satisfying and devoid of conﬂict. Even the best of friends and signiﬁcant others
can have disagreements, even angry disagreements, when in bad moods or on
opposite sides of an issue. Learning to deal with anger, which is inevitable in
any relationship, is an important skill you’ll want to develop for getting over
the rough spots in any interpersonal interaction.
HOW TO SUCCESSFULLY HANDLE ANGER IN PERSON-TO-PERSON
INTERACTION
Angry friends, coworkers, or family members create stress. ey can make your
work and home life most unpleasant. Developing eﬀective anger management
strategies forms the cornerstone for goodwill and a distinctly more pleasant
environment, at home and in the oﬃce.
An eﬀective anger management strategy involves keeping the focus of the
conversation on the angry party, allowing him or her to vent, and in addition
provides a directed course of action to deal with the problem that caused the
anger in the ﬁrst place. is breaks the anger cycle and allows for the resolution
of crisis situations without damaging personal relationships. People will like
you more as a result of your handling of a crisis situation because in the end
you will make the angry party feel good about themselves by reducing their
stress and, equally important, yours as well. Here are some guidelines for
handling anger in the best way possible.
Do Not Engage Angry People Because They Are Not Thinking Logically
Anger triggers the ﬁght or ﬂight response, which mentally and physically
prepares the body for survival. During the ﬁght or ﬂight response, the body
automatically responds to a threat without conscious thought. As the threat
increases, a person’s ability to reason diminishes. Angry people experience the
same phenomenon because anger is a reaction to a real or perceived threat.
Angry people talk and act without thinking. e level of their cognitive
impairment depends on the intensity of their anger. e more angry people
become, the less likely they are to logically process information. Angry
individuals are not open to solutions when they are mad, because their ability
to think logically is impaired.
e body takes about twenty minutes to return to normal after a full ﬁght
or ﬂight response. In other words, angry people need time to calm down
before they can think clearly again. Angry people will not completely
comprehend any explanations, solutions, or problem-solving options until they
can think logically again. Allowing for this refractory period is a critical part of
any anger management strategy. e ﬁrst strategy for breaking the anger cycle
is “Never try to rationally engage angry people.” Anger must be vented before
oﬀering problem solving solutions.
It is imperative when confronting an angry individual to take “time oﬀ to
cool oﬀ.” One writer suggests that when dealing with an angry friend,
colleague, or partner you should “go to the balcony.” is is another way of
indicating that you need to step back from the ﬁre and let things cool oﬀ a bit
before returning to the ﬂames.
In many instances, providing a simple explanation can assuage anger. People
want to feel like they are in control. Angry people seek order in a world that no
longer makes sense to them. e inability to make sense of a disordered world
causes frustration. is frustration is expressed as anger. Providing an
explanation for a given behavior or problem will often reorder a disordered
world and soothe the angered person’s feelings in the process. e following
exchange between a super visor and a subordinate demonstrates the use of this
technique:
SUPERVISOR: I expected you to have your report done by this morning. Your behavior is
unacceptable. (anger)
EMPLOYEE: I couldn’t complete the report because I didn’t receive the data from the sales
department. ey said they would send it within the hour. (provide an explanation)
SUPERVISOR: All right. Get the report ﬁnished as soon as possible. (anger resolution)
If angry people do not accept the simple explanation for a problem, the
potential for verbal escalation increases signiﬁcantly. Anger needs fuel. e
increased anger provokes you to give a more intense response, which provides
additional fuel to an angry supervisor. If this anger cycle continues, at some
point your ﬁght or ﬂight threshold is crossed, causing a reduction in your
ability to think logically. Problem solving becomes impossible when both you
and the other person get caught up in the anger cycle.
Try the “Big Three” Approach to Breaking the Anger Cycle: Empathic
Statements, Venting, and Presumptive Statements
Empathic statements capture a person’s verbal message, physical status, or
emotions, and using parallel language, reﬂect them back to the speaker.
Venting reduces frustration. Once angry people are provided a chance to vent
their frustrations, they become more open to solutions because they think
more clearly when they are not angry. Presumptive statements direct angry
people to take a course of action that leads toward the resolution of the conﬂict
that aroused their ire in the ﬁrst place. Presumptive statements are constructed
in such a fashion that angry individuals have diﬃculty not following the
directed (recommended) course of action. e following dialogue
demonstrates the big-three approach to breaking the anger cycle.
SUPERVISOR: I expected you to have your report done by this morning. Your behavior is
unacceptable. (anger)
EMPLOYEE: I couldn’t complete the report because I didn’t receive the data from the sales
department. ey said they would send it within the hour. (provide an explanation)
SUPERVISOR: at’s no excuse. You should have gone to the sales department to get the
report. You knew how important it was to get the report done by this morning. I have a
meeting with the client this afternoon. I’m not sure what I’m going to do. (rejecting the
explanation)
EMPLOYEE: You’re upset because the client is expecting the report this afternoon. (empathic
statement)
SUPERVISOR: Yeah. You’re making me look bad. (venting)
EMPLOYEE: You’re disappointed because you expected me to have the report ﬁnished this
morning. (empathic statement)
SUPERVISOR: Exactly. at’s an understatement. (shoulders droop accompanied by a deep
exhale; venting completed)
EMPLOYEE: I’ll go get the sales report now and get you the report before your meeting this
afternoon. (presumptive statement)
SUPERVISOR: Okay. See what you can do. (anger resolution)
A CLOSER LOOK AT HOW THE “BIG THREE” WORK TO “BREAK THE ANGER
CYCLE”
Empathic Statements
In breaking the anger cycle, empathic statements are invaluable. When an
angry person ﬁrst hears an empathic statement it can be surprising and
confusing. When not expected, it can initially cause suspicion, but when
sustained it is diﬃcult not to appreciate the concern it represents. Empathy
thus quickly leads to trust.
e more you can empathize, the more you can get immediate feedback on
what a person is thinking about what you are saying to them. As a
consequence, you can modify what you are saying and doing if you see your
initial approach is not working.
e question is: How do you do this? How do you empathize eﬀectively?
How do you ﬁnd out what other people are feeling? All you have to go on is
observing: 1) what they say, 2) how they say it, and 3) what they do.
If you want to move an angry person toward a resolution, detecting their
emotional state is the ﬁrst step. When you can sense their emotion, you can
then use this to move them in the direction you want them to take.
e trick to spotting a person’s feelings is to pay close attention to verbal
and nonverbal changes in that individual in response to external events. If you
say, “How are you?” and the corners of the person’s mouth turn down and
their voice tone goes ﬂat, then you might detect that all is not well.
e better you are at spotting changes in verbal and nonverbal cues, the
greater your potential ability at empathizing. Watch for small changes on the
face. Listen for tension in the voice and emphasis on speciﬁc words. Listen for
emotional words.
To avoid getting swamped by another person’s emotions, learn to dip in and
out of the association that makes you feel what they do. Go in, test the
temperature, and then get out to a place where you can think more rationally.
Unless you are sure, it ca n be a good idea to reﬂect back on the other person
what you are sensing of their feelings, to check that you have it right. After all,
the only individual who can conﬁrm empathy is the person whose emotions
are being sensed. Reﬂecting back has an eﬀect, typically leading the other
person to appreciate that you  really care about them and hence increasing their
trust in you.
To people who are not angry, empathic statements might seem patronizing,
but this is not the case for angry people, for two reasons. First, the ﬁght or
ﬂight response is engaged, and angry people cannot logically process
information; in this case, empathic statements fall within the human baseline
and if properly constructed, will not be detected by the angry person. Second,
people naturally think that others should listen to them and be sympathetic,
particularly when they are angry.
e key to constructing eﬀective empathic statements is to identify the
underlying reason for the anger. Simply saying, “So you’re angry” is an
empathic statement, but it is stating the obvious and could sound patronizing,
which would add more fuel to an already angry person. I remember a time
early in my FBI career when I was required to travel extensively. We had three
children at the time, a baby and two toddlers. On one particular trip, I was
gone for two weeks. When I opened the front door and announced that I was
home, I expected a warm hug and a kiss from my wife. at didn’t happen.
Instead she greeted me with “It’s about time you got home. I’m going crazy
because you haven’t been here to help me with the kids.” I could have used the
simple empathic statement “So, you’re angry,” but that would not have gone
over well. Instead, I used a sophisticated empathic statement that addressed the
root cause of her anger. I said, “You feel overwhelmed because I haven’t been
home to help you with the kids.” I struck a sensitive cord. She vented. “I
usually go out every Wednesday night with my friends to take a break from the
kids and talk to some adults for a change.” I could have used a simple
empathic statement such as “You miss going out with your friends,” but, again,
this would not have played out well. Instead, I used a sophisticated empathic
statement that addressed the root cause of her anger. I said, “You value the
time you spend with your friends because it gives you a chance to take a break
from the kids.”
Anger is just a symptom of an underlying problem. Empathic statements
should target the underlying problem. Exposing the real cause of the anger will
promote venting, which can be controlled by constructing eﬀective empathic
statements.
Venting
Venting is a critical component of breaking the anger cycle because it reduces
frustration. Empathic statements portray the target of the anger as
nonthreatening, which reduces the impact of the angry person’s ﬁght or ﬂight
response. Once angry people vent their frustrations, they become more open to
solutions because they think more clearly when they are less angry.
Venting is not a singular event, but rather a series of events. e initial
venting is typically the strongest. is allows angry people to “burn oﬀ” most
of their anger at the onset of the exchange. Subsequent venting becomes
increasingly less intense, unless fuel is added to reignite the anger.
A natural pause occurs after each venting event. During this pause, you
should construct an empathic statement. Since empathic statements encourage
venting, the angry person will likely continue venting, although with less
intensity. After the next natural pause, you should construct another empathic
statement. You should continue constructing empathic statements until the
other person’s anger is spent. Sighs, long exhales, slumping shoulders, and
downward glances signal spent anger. At this juncture, you should introduce
the presumptive statement.
Presumptive Statements
Presumptive statements direct angry people to take a course of action that leads
toward conﬂict resolution. Presumptive statements are constructed in such a
fashion that angry people have diﬃculty not following the directed course of
action. Constructing presumptive statements requires practiced critical
listening skills. e presumptive statement turns the force of the anger toward
a resolution that is acceptable for both parties.
Let’s return to my awkward homecoming discussed previously. After a series
of empathic statements, my wife’s anger burned oﬀ. She let out a great sigh and
her shoulders slumped. Her anger was spent. Now was the time to present a
presumptive statement to direct her to take a course of action that would bring
a resolution. I constructed the following presumptive statement: “Why don’t I
gather the kids up and take them to my mom’s house and we’ll go out to a nice
restaurant? You deserve it.” My wife would have had a diﬃcult time not
following the course of action I presented. If she rejected my suggested course
of action, she would have to admit that she didn’t deserve to go to a nice
restaurant, that she didn’t feel overwhelmed, and that she didn’t need a break
from the kids, which are the very things she expressed as she vented her anger.
Using this technique, I eﬀectively resolved a situation that could have easily
escalated into a major domestic dispute, which would have left us both angry
and frustrated.
If an angry person rejects the presumptive statement, you should begin the
breaking of the anger cycle again with a new empathic statement. If my wife
had rejected my suggested course of action, our conversation might have gone
something like this:
ME: Why don’t I gather the kids up and take them to my mom’s house and we’ll go out to a nice
restaurant? You deserve it. (presumptive statement)
MY WIFE: You’re not getting oﬀ that easy, Mister. (rejection of the presumptive statement)
ME: So you think one night out is not enough to make up for the work you did while I was
gone. (empathic statement; reentering breaking the anger cycle)
Rejection of the presumptive statement typically indicates that the person
has not completely vented his or her anger. Reentering breaking the anger cycle
allows the person to vent any residual anger. Some people have deep-seated
anger issues that may never be resolved. In these cases, the best course of action
you could oﬀer is to agree to disagree or you could both agree not to bring the
sensitive topic up again. ese possible resolutions set boundaries for your
relationships, not abruptly end them.
e anger cycle can be used in virtually all situations when you are
confronted by angry people. e following exchange between a customs oﬃcer
and a foreign visitor illustrates the use of the anger cycle to resolve a dispute.
CUSTOMS OFFICER: Ma’am, you can’t bring dirt into this country.
VISITOR: It is sacred dirt from a holy place. I will not give it up!
CUSTOMS OFFICER: So, you don’t want to give up the dirt because it is special to you.
(empathic statement)
VISITOR: Of course, it’s special. It’s blessed ground. It keeps evil spirits away. It protects me
from illness. I will not give it up and you can’t make me! (venting)
CUSTOMS OFFICER: is dirt fends oﬀ evil spirits and keeps you healthy. (empathic
statement)
VISITOR: I haven’t been sick even once since I got the dirt. I really need it. (venting)
CUSTOMERS OFFICER: Staying healthy means a lot to you. (empathic statement)
VISITOR: Yes, it does. (a sigh accompanied by a shoulder drop)
CUSTOMS OFFICER: Let’s work together to come up with a solution to this problem.
(presumptive statement) Would you like that?” (e visitor cannot say “No” without
appearing unreasonable.)
VISITOR: Of course.
CUSTOMS OFFICER: e regulation states that you cannot bring dirt into the country
because the microbes in the dirt could infest crops. (provides an explanation) I’m sure you
don’t want to be responsible for making millions of people sick, do you? (presumptive
statement) (e visitor cannot say “Yes” without appearing unreasonable.)
CUSTOMS OFFICER: Give me the dirt and you will be able to begin your visit to the United
States.
VISITOR: If I have to, okay. (voluntary compliance)
REENTERING THE ANGER CYCLE
In the event the visitor remained angry and did not voluntarily give up the
dirt, the customs oﬃcer would reenter the anger cycle in an attempt to break
it. e following exchange demonstrates reentry into the cycle.
CUSTOMS OFFICER: Give me the dirt and you will be able to begin your visit to the United
States.
VISITOR: No, my dirt isn’t contaminated. I have to keep it.
CUSTOMS OFFICER: You are pretty passionate about keeping your dirt. (empathic statement)
VISITOR: I want my dirt! Can I, at least, keep a teaspoonful? (movement toward voluntary
compliance)
CUSTOMS OFFICER: You are trying to ﬁgure out a way to get at least some of your dirt into
the country. (empathic statement)
VISITOR: Yes, of course. Can I keep at least a teaspoon? at surely won’t hurt anything.
(movement toward voluntary compliance)
CUSTOMS OFFICER: e smallest amount of dirt can do great harm to the crops. (provides
an explanation) Give me the dirt and you will be able to begin your visit to the United States.
(presumptive statement)
VISITOR: All right. If I have to, I’ll give it to you. I really don’t want to do this. (voluntary
compliance)
In the event that reentering the anger cycle does not produce voluntary
compliance, the customs oﬃcer should develop two options and then allow the
angry person to choose one of the options. Giving angry people two options to
choose from creates the illusion that they’re in control. e following exchange
illustrates the “You choose” technique.
VISITOR: I refuse to give up my dirt.
CUSTOMS OFFICER: You seem pretty adamant about keeping your dirt. (empathic
statement) e regulation states that you can’t bring dirt into the country. You’re going to have
to make a decision. e ﬁrst option is to give up your dirt and enter the country. e second
option is to keep your dirt and not be allowed to enter the country. (presents two options) It’s
your decision. What happens from this point forward is up to you. Choose the option you
prefer. (creating the illusion that the visitor is in control)
VISITOR: I have no real choice because I want to enter the country. You can have the dirt.
(voluntary compliance)
CUSTOMS OFFICER: You made the right decision. Welcome to America.
In each of these scenarios, the oﬃcer maintained the illusion that the visitor
was in control of the situation, but in reality the oﬃcer directed the visitor one
step at a time toward voluntary compliance.
Some people feel they relinquish their authority when they use compliance
techniques that subtly inﬂuence rather than intimidate. Gaining voluntary
compliance through breaking the anger cycle not only enhances your authority
but also reduces the probability that the contact will go awry and the angry
person will just get madder and less compliant. By your breaking the anger
cycle, there is a good chance the angry person will go along with the decision
you wanted them to make and, at the same time, feel you treated them with
respect. O ne couldn’t hope for a better outcome to an angry confrontation.
WHEN RELATIONSHIPS “GO SOUTH” EVEN AFTER YOU’VE TRIED TO SAVE
THEM
If you utilize the tools described in this book to establish and maintain healthy,
happy relationships, you will almost always be successful. But what if, even
after your best eﬀorts, a short- or long-term relationship goes bad? What then?
Particularly with long-term interactions, where a signiﬁcant amount of time
and commitment has already been invested in the relationship, one would
hope relationships would not be casually discarded at the ﬁrst signs of distress.
And, in fact, they usually aren’t. Most individuals enter into marriages and
other forms of long-term relationships with the intention of staying in them.
Yet there are times when even well-intentioned and responsible individuals
ﬁnd it diﬃcult, if not impossible, to remain in a long-term relationship. Why?
ere are many reasons, but some of the most common include:
• A divergence of interests. Individuals who might have shared the same outlook and career
paths in their twenties may have diﬀerent perspectives thirty years later. A new career or life
focus can weigh heavily on a long-term relationship if both parties are not seeing eye to eye on
the change(s) involved.
• e “empty nest” syndrome. When children leave the nest, one or both of the parents
sometimes choose the same option.
• e need for more freedom. Couples who have been together for a long time, particularly if
they married young, sometimes feel “trapped” and yearn for the freedom they see their single
friends enjoying. is is a classic case of “the grass is greener” syndrome. Married people yearn
for the freedom that single people have and single people yearn for the commitment that
married people enjoy.
• e need for change. Ever wonder why people in their late sixties and seventies opt to end
long-term relationships? Sometimes it is simply the recognition that one doesn’t live forever
and that if one desires the chance to experience a diﬀerent lifestyle, the window of opportunity
is closing fast.
• Changes in personality in one or both partners. Our personalities are not static or set in
stone by the time we are adolescents. We change over time and if these changes drive people
apart, they usually end up parting.
• ird-party disruptions. Behavioral scientists have long debated the issue of whether humans
are “naturally” monogamous. While they continue to argue, long-term relationships continue
to crumble due to inﬁdelity and partner replacement with a new love interest.
• Boredom. Too much of the same thing can create boredom, an accelerant for relationship
breakdowns, which can make once-exciting interactions seem mundane and unsatisfying.
• Emerging incompatibilities. As relationships develop, so do the persons in the relationship.
is can lead to problems, should one party to the relationship develop behaviors unacceptable
to the other. For example, one partner in a relationship might start drinking or gambling too
much, or show less interest in sex, or become more reclusive, even start snoring (to the dismay
of their light-sleeping mate).
e good news is that many, if not all, of these problems can be overcome
through mutual eﬀort or counseling if the people involved are committed to
staying together and are willing to do what it takes to repair the relationship
and make it whole.
Even the best of friends can have the worst of arguments!
Good relationships, short or long term, take eﬀort to bloom. Like the
gardener who wants his plants and trees to fully blossom, you must nurture
relationships with care, patience, and loving under standing if you want them
to ﬂower. Relationships can’t be left to die at the ﬁrst sign of blight. You need
to be convinced that you’ve done as much as you can to save a relationship
before you consider ending it.
IN CASE OF DIVORCE . . . BREAK GLASS
I was once given a wonderful piece of advice that I pass on to young couples
whenever I can: When relationships are still new, vibrant, and full of love,
write letters to each other. Pour your hearts out and go into great detail about
what you like and admire about the other person. But don’t share the letters.
Instead, place them in separate sealed envelopes with your partner’s name on
the front. en place the letters in a box, which you’ll want to store in a safe
place.
In the event the relationship goes sour, you can give each other the letters
and read them. is emotional reminder may be enough to recharge the
feelings of love and jump-start a new era of togetherness. e letters can also
be used as an emotional icebreaker to motivate you to resolve any major issues
where you are at an impasse and need “something” to get you and your partner
back on track toward solving your problem(s).
One man I mentioned this idea to actually made a wooden container with a
glass front similar to a ﬁre alarm box found in many buildings. He then aﬃxed
a little metal hammer to the box with a metal chain. e sign on the box read,
“In case of divorce, break glass.” e letters in the box served as a constant
reminder to the couple of the reasons they liked and admired each other when
they ﬁrst fell in love. In the middle of a ﬁght or escalating disagreement, either
one of them could comment, “Is it time to break the glass?” is not-so- subtle
reminder quickly deescalated the ﬁght or disagreement and helped the couple
resolve their conﬂict successfully.
8
THE PERILS AND PROMISE OF
RELATIONSHIPS IN A DIGITAL WORLD
Online everyone can be who they want to be. It only gets tricky when you meet them in the
real world.
—TOKII.COM
is is a true story. A love story of sorts, one that could only happen in our
digital age. It involves a then-sixty-eight-year-old professor and a Czech bikini
model. is particular academician was not lacking in brainpower: He worked
as a theoretical particle physicist at the University of North Carolina, Chapel
Hill, where he had been employed for three decades.
e professor, still lonely after his recent divorce, visited some online dating
sites, where he connected with the Czech beauty. After a ﬂurry of emails, chat
room sessions, and instant messages, it became obvious to the professor that
the stunning model wanted to give up her career and marry him. It never
seemed to cross his mind that the woman on the Internet might have been an
imposter or why a young, attractive model would choose him as a husband.
Sadly, he found out why, the hard way. After many unsuccessful attempts by
the professor to speak with the young woman on the phone, she agreed to go
from virtual reality to real life. All the professor had to do was ﬂy down to
Bolivia, where she was currently working, and meet her. is he readily agreed
to do. e rest of the story is almost too painful to relate.
Upon arriving late in Bolivia due to a ticketing problem, the professor
discovered that his “girlfriend” had already left. However, she told him not to
worry, she would send him a ticket to Brussels, Belgium, where he could join
her while she did a photo shoot. Her only request was to bring along a bag that
she had left behind in Bolivia. At the Buenos Aires airport, the bag was
searched. Hidden inside were 1,980 grams of cocaine. He did end up being
charged for drug smuggling, but fortunately for him he received a very light
sentence.
And what was the real Czech bikini model’s reaction to all this? Fear, over
her name being associated with drug smuggling and “sympathy” for her
academic suitor, who, of course, she had never met on the Internet or
anywhere else. According to Maxine Swann, a reporter who did an elaborate
story on the incident for the New York Times, the professor “reported that he
was a month into his prison stay before his fellow prisoners managed to
convince him that the woman he thought he’d been in touch with all this time
had probably been a man impersonating her.”
Based on this story, you might think I recommend abstaining from using
the digital world to meet people and make friends. However, nothing could be
further from the truth. As long as you know how to tell the friends from the
frauds (which this chapter will show you), the online landscape oﬀers some
distinct advantages.
THE INTERNET IS INTROVERT-FRIENDLY
Introverts disclose more information on social networks than they do in face-
to-face encounters. is is because the Internet format allows introverts
suﬃcient time to formulate meaningful responses. Introverts also experience
diﬃculty initiating conversations, especially with strangers. Social networks
eliminate this added social pressure. Social networks also allow introverts to
express themselves without constantly being interrupted by extroverts. Finally,
introverts are more willing to say what they really believe, not having to worry
about the direct exposure to negative feedback that can occur in face-to-face
communication.
Ease of Finding “Common Ground”
If ever there was a chance for the Law of Similarity (Chapter 4) to operate, it
would be on the Internet. When it comes to ﬁnding common ground with
individuals possessing similar interests, the digital world provides the perfect
environment for matchups. Want to ﬁnd fellow stamp collectors? ere’s an
Internet group for that. Interested in people who exhibit antique automobiles?
ere’s an Internet group for that. Looking for that special group of sports
fanatics who also volunteer at animal shelters and eat organic apples from the
state of Washington? ere’s an Internet group for that. Well, maybe.
e point is that with millions of people on the Internet and thousands of
chat rooms and special interest groups devoted to almost any activity, real or
imaginable, the chance to develop friendships with people sharing similar
interests is never more than a click away.
Numbers
If you’re looking for a friend with speciﬁc qualiﬁcations and interests, where
would you rather look: in a bar or other public place that might hold a
hundred people, or on the Internet, where tens of millions of people await to
be clicked on? e sheer number of people that go online increases your
chances of ﬁnding persons of interest who best ﬁt your particular needs.
Less Chance of Being Embarrassed
Anonymity and the ability to start and end relationships with a click of a
mouse make the online user much less likely to face the humiliation and
embarrassment that comes with face-to-face disapproval or outright rejection.
Of course, should an online user post information and pictures of a
questionable nature, the chance of embarrassment deﬁnitely is increased (as has
been the case with numerous high-proﬁle politicians and celebrities over the
years).
The Ability to Prequalify Potential Friends
Particularly on dating sites, individuals looking for partners have the
opportunity to describe what they want in a potential respondent. Of course,
not all people reading the qualiﬁcations abide by them. Many individuals will
contact you on the Internet even when they do not possess the qualiﬁcations
you are looking for. Still, screening mechanisms on certain online sites can be
beneﬁcial in limiting the number of people who contact you.
The Opportunity to “Check People Out”
e Internet is information-rich. It provides a wealth of information for those
people who know how to get it or are interested in learning more about
something or somebody. e Internet should be seen as a tool to learn more
about the people you are considering to develop relationships with, whether
that person is someone you meet face-to-face or online. Obviously, this
information search is more important for potential online friends, because you
don’t have the advantage of information-gathering through verbal and
nonverbal cues available in real-life interactions.
ere is simply no denying that the advent of person-to-person online
communication has dramatically altered the landscape of seeking friends and
building relationships. As this form of digital interaction continues to grow in
popularity, it will have an even greater impact on the way people develop
relationships in the years to come.
What does all this mean for you? To paraphrase Charles Dickens: “It can be
the best of times; it can be the worst of times.” When employed correctly and
with appropriate safeguards, establishing friendships in the digital world can be
a rewarding and fruitful experience; however, plunging headlong into Internet
relationships without proper attention to the potential risks involved is a
sureﬁre recipe for disaster. Before you ﬁre up your laptop or reach for your
smartphone, here are some important things to keep in mind.
CAUTION: IMMORTALITY AHEAD
Facebook. Twitter. Instagram. Chat rooms. Special interest groups. Email.
Blogs. Internet search engines. Dating sites. A literal cornu copia of
opportunities to search for and meet people who could end up being friends or
even lifelong partners.
But be afraid, or to paraphrase the famous Jaws trailer, be very afraid of the
potential price you pay whenever you go on the Internet. Anything you say,
anywhere you visit, any pictures you post, even your emails and instant
messages can gain instant Internet immortality, leaving you with a
cyberfootprint, which, unlike a footprint in the sand, is not easily washed
away!
Increasingly, prospective employers, potential lovers, would-be stalkers,
businesses, and even government agencies are using your cyber activities to
learn more about you and make decisions about how they will treat you, even
if the information they use is decades old!
Please keep in mind that what you post is who you are . . . forever.
Whenever you sit down at the computer and sign onto the Internet, always
keep this sentence in mind: “Would I be embarrassed if what I am about to do
would suddenly appear on the front page of my local newspaper tomorrow, in
a month, or in ten years?” If the answer is “yes” or “maybe,” stop and think
before you hit the send button or enter key . . . i t just might save you heartache
and disappointment tomorrow and down the road.
LEARN AND USE PROPER DIGITAL ETIQUETTE WHEN VISITING
CYBERSPACE
Technology is evolving so quickly that social norms for using things like
computers and smartphones don’t always keep pace. Nevertheless, there are
some general guidelines that, if followed, should make online experiences safer
and more enjoyable for you and those around you. It will also increase your
chances for making friends, rather than enemies, both online and in the
immediate vicin ity where you are texting, talking, or searching.
Smartphones
In a Florida movie theater a man was shot to death for using his smartphone
after the house lights were dimmed. Chances are you won’t experience a similar
fate should you choose to text or talk in an inappropriate manner or place;
however, there are simple guidelines you’ll want to follow to protect yourself
and your information from harm.
1. All mobile communication devices should be silenced in any public or private location where a
ringtone would be distracting and/or inappropriate.
2. All mobile communication device users should refrain from speaking on their phones in any
public or private location where vocalizations would be distracting and/or inappropriate.
(Example: I didn’t go out for a relaxing meal at a nice restaurant to hear your long-winded
discourse about problems at home or work.)
3. Smartphones can be hacked. Pictures and other information you would not want to see
reprinted in your local newspaper would best be removed from the device.
4. Most cell phone bills provide a detailed history of calls to and from your device. If you would
prefer that others not know who you called and who called you, it might be wise to keep this
in mind.
5. Recording yourself doing things which, for lack of a better word, might be deemed
inappropriate by others is probably not a good idea. Case in point: A woman from the United
Kingdom picked up her boyfriend’s smartphone and found images of him having sex with a
dog. To make matters worse, it was her dog! How the woman reacted to this chain of events
was not reported.
6. “Sexting”—particularly when pictures are included—is just not a good idea, even between
husband and wife. ese photos have a nasty way of suddenly appearing on social media
websites, particularly if the husband and wife get divorced and one or both of them are
vindictive.
7. Don’t Let V/R (Virtual Reality) trump R/W (Real World) relationships. Individuals vary in
their tolerance of cell phone conversations (and constantly checking social media) undertaken
by someone they are with. Even if your companion (date, friend, or business associate) is more
tech-savvy and tolerant than most, it is still considered inappropriate for you to be taking calls,
checking messages, and frequently glancing over at your cell during your time together. In an
earlier chapter on verbal communication, I pointed out how important it was to listen in a
focused manner to the person you are talking with. It shows interest and respect, fostering a
superior environment for making people like you and keeping friends. If you insist on seeing
your phone as an umbilical cord in the presence of others, don’t expect the birth of a good
relationship.
8. Because cell phones retain their initial area code (regardless of where they are used) and,
further, because transmission of cell phone conversations is not always clear, it is important
when you leave your number for a callback that you start with the area code and repeat the
entire number twice. at way, you increase your chances that the recipient of your message
will have the information necessary to get back to you.
Electronic Messages (Email)
1. Emails fall somewhere between text messages and letters when it comes to how formal or
informal your communication can be. Obviously, emails to prospective employers or
important business contacts should be more reﬂective of a traditional letter, well thought out,
and grammatically sound. at being said, it is advisable to keep all emails free of the type of
abbreviations normally used in texting, and check for spelling mistakes before transmitting
your messages.
2. Carefully consider your screen name when using email communications. A screen name that
might be acceptable for communications between friends could be wildly inappropriate if used
when contacting prospective employers or your kid’s school oﬃcial. One of my colleagues who
teaches human resource management in a business school showed me her “Inappropriate
Screen Name Hall of Fame” list, which included names actually used by her students in
applying for jobs. Number one on the list was “Lickmered.”
3. Don’t write email text in capital letters (LIKE THIS). It is considered to be the equivalent of
shouting at someone in verbal interactions and is viewed as rude.
4. Never write an email when you are extremely angry or distraught. In an earlier chapter, I
emphasized that people who are agitated in such a manner have diﬃculty thinking rationally.
An email written during these times often reﬂects this damaged thought process. If you must
write such a message, don’t send it; not immediately, anyway. Put it aside for several hours and
then reread it when you have calmed down and you can think more rationally. Only then
should you consider sending it . . . probably with signiﬁcant revisions. Another good reason
not to immediately send out an angry email is its potential to further escalate the situation. e
problem might be resolved (or go away) within a few hours if “left alone.” A hasty, angry
response eﬀectively eliminates this possibility.
5. When you are ready to send an email be sure to check to whom it is being sent. Many
embarrassing incidents could have been avoided if the email sender had made sure his or her
message was being sent to a speciﬁc person and not “reply all.”
6. An email can be “forever” (or at least linger in cyberspace for months, even years). Once an
email is “out there” it can take on a life of its own: reproduced, forwarded, archived. Each time
you write an email you should ask yourself: “What if this email went public and stayed public
for a signiﬁcant period of time: would I still send it?”
7. Deleted emails can still be recovered for months after you have “erased” them. is is because
many Internet servers “save” deleted emails on their computers. e recovery of supposedly
“deleted” emails has revealed sensitive information about (or from) individuals they thought
was safely destroyed. Oftentimes, these persons discovered this unsettling news in open court.
8. Never open an email attachment unless you are sure you know who sent it and that they, in
fact, were the senders. (Email addresses are sometimes illegally accessed from a person’s
computer and then used to send messages containing viruses to everyone on that person’s
contact list. It appears that the message is legitimate because it is sent from the compromised
person’s computer.) In general, it is best not to open any email attachments unless absolutely
necessary. Protecting your computer with security programs that screen attachments (for
example, Norton or McAfee) is advised; otherwise, opening attachments on your computer is
akin to having unprotected sex.
Social Sites (Facebook, Twitter, Tumblr, etc.)
1. Social sites vary in their ﬁltering mechanisms: who can and cannot see your postings. Be sure
you are familiar with these ﬁlters and use them appropriately.
2. Assume that anything you post on a social site can be accessed and reproduced for others to see.
Further, keep in mind that those college parties where you were photographed drinking and
having a “good old time” might someday be accessed by a prospective employer, potential (or
actual) spouse, or even your parents and in-laws!
3. As a general rule, it is wise to limit your digital footprint online. Excessive use of social sites
enlarges that footprint and might cause problems down the road.
4. Be careful who you friend!
DIGITAL DETECTIVES
As you know by now, I am a frequent ﬂyer. This time, I approached the gate at the Nashville airport to see if I
could ﬂy standby on an earlier ﬂight, but this story is not about me getting an upgrade. The gate clerks, a man
and a woman, were intently examining a very expensive digital camera. I heard them comment to each other,
“There’s no name on the camera or any other unique identifying information. We have to ﬁnd out who this
camera belongs to and give it back to them.” I asked them what they were doing.” In unison they said, “We’re
the FBI agents of American Airlines.” I told them I was a real FBI agent, although I was retired. I asked them
how they could ﬁnd the owner of the camera without any clues. The man explained that they would turn the
camera on and look for clues in the pictures the owner took. I was intrigued as I saw them go through the
process of solving the digital puzzle. As they shufﬂed through the date-stamped pictures, they gathered digital
clues. The owner was a male of Hispanic descent. It appeared that he had spent three days in Las Vegas,
probably on business, because there were no family pictures. He stayed at the Bellagio Hotel. They continued to
scroll through the pictures. The woman high-ﬁved the man and shrieked, “I found it!” She showed me the
picture on the camera that was taken the previous week. The photo depicted a newer, wood-frame house with
blue siding. I saw the picture, but I didn’t see what triggered their excitement. She pointed to the house and
said, “Those kinds of houses are typically built on the East Coast in mid-Atlantic states.” “Okay,” I thought, “so
what?” She then directed me to the barely visible “For Sale” sign in the front yard. “Okay,” I said, not sure of
the signiﬁcance of the sign. She used the camera’s zoom feature to make the address and telephone number of
the real estate agency clearly visible. The real estate ofﬁce was in Columbia, South Carolina. I ﬁnally got it. I
blurted out loud, “The owner of the camera was probably from Columbia, South Carolina, because people
typically don’t take pictures of houses for sale unless they are considering a purchase.” The woman added, “An
earlier ﬂight we boarded was headed to Columbia, South Carolina.” She pulled up the passenger list and,
fortunately, there were only a few Hispanic names listed. I had to board my ﬂight, but I was conﬁdent that the
FBI agents of American Airlines would locate the owner and return the camera. I was amazed by how easy it
was to track the movements of the owner of the lost camera using a few abstract digital clues. I was even more
amazed that they went the extra mile to return the lost camera. They said they returned many lost or forgotten
electronic devices using similar methods. The point of the story is that in a digital world, it’s hard to remain
anonymous. Keep this in mind the next time you post something on the Internet or do something as benign as
taking a digital photograph.
CATPHISH OR CAVIAR: WHAT YOU NEED TO KNOW BEFORE DEVELOPING
ONLINE RELATIONSHIPS
e Internet provides a fertile environment for growing friendships and even
lifelong liaisons between individuals. is has led to the development of
websites that facilitate the online “dating” process and make it easier for
individuals interested in ﬁnding signiﬁcant others to “hook up.” e people
who own these websites claim great success in getting “soul mates” together:
providing the mechanism through which people meet online and, eventually,
establish long-term commitments in the real world.
Using the Internet to ﬁnd “Mr.” or “Ms. Right” can be a rewarding
experience. It can also be a living hell. How your experience turns out depends
on many factors, most of which will be discussed here. Although no one can
guarantee that your Internet-generated relationships will be successful and
trouble-free, there are some things you can do to increase your chances of
experiencing positive outcomes—and reducing negative ones—when it comes
to choosing friends and potential partners online.
LOVE AT FIRST BYTE
e young man was a star Notre Dame football player who fell in love with a
woman he met online. en tragedy struck: his sweetheart died of leukemia.
To make matters worse, she died on the same day the football player’s
grandmother passed away.
e star player’s twin tragedies became a national news item. But that story
was soon eclipsed by an even bigger story: it turned out that the woman he
loved didn’t die after all, because she never lived in the ﬁrst place! It turned out
she was a person created in cyberspace by someone with a very sick sense of
humor.
And then there’s the saga of Sana and Adnan Klaric. It seems the couple’s
married life was not going well and so, unbeknownst to each other, each Klaric
assumed a fake screen name, Sweetie and Prince of Joy respectively, and hit the
online chat rooms complaining about their dismal marriage and searching for a
new “Mr.” and “Mrs.” Right.
It took some time and a lot of keystrokes but at last the two estranged
partners found online individuals who seemed to resonate with their problems
and provide the kind words so missing in their marriage.
Sana and Adnan knew they had found the real loves of their lives. ey
agreed to meet their new partners at a prearranged time and place. On the big
day, Sana and Adnan made excuses to each other about having to leave for
appointments, each making sure their indiscretion would not be detected.
en they set oﬀ to meet their online paramours, the perfect replacements for
what they had back home.
When they arrived at their rendezvous point, Sana and Adnan met their
online lovers for the ﬁrst time. It was not love at ﬁrst sight. It turned out that
Sana and Adnan had unknowingly been carrying on their online aﬀair with
each other!
One might best leave it to ethicists and lawyers to decide if Sana and Adnan
were being unfaithful, as it is diﬃcult to imagine committing adultery with
your own spouse; however, “Sweetie” and “Prince of Joy” were not pleased and,
at last report, were accusing each other of being unfaithful and ﬁling for
divorce.
What do all these stories demonstrate?
1. Relationships developed over the Internet can be as powerful as those developed in face-to-face
interactions, sometimes more so.
2. On the Internet, things are not always as they appear.
3. If a world-class physicist can be duped over the Internet, you probably can be, too.
4. ere are creepy, mean, sick people populating the Internet just as they do in the real world.
5. Scams involving relationships on the Internet are more common than most of us imagine.
ey have become so widespread, in fact, that a documentary ﬁlm, MTV reality series, and
feature ﬁlm have been based on the problem. A word has even been coined, catﬁsh, which, as
Internet attorney Parry Aftab says, refers to “anybody who pretends to be someone who they’re
not on social media. It’s done all the time.” I’ve taken that expression one step further with
“catphish” to also include the hackers who wish to steal your identity.
6. Because of the “cloak of secrecy” provided by the Internet, people will say things in cyberspace
they would never say in a personal interaction.
7. On the Internet, as in real life, if it’s too good to be true, it probably is! Social networks can be
hazardous. No communication posted to the Internet can be guaranteed to remain private. You
must assume that your posts are permanent and public.
8. As in face-to-face communications, pretending to be someone you are not often leads to
unpleasant outcomes.
9. ere are things you can do to navigate the Internet more safely and eﬀectively. Some
suggestions are provided in the following pages. ese suggestions are not only relevant for
individuals seeking love on the Internet; they will be helpful for anyone looking for friends in
cyberspace.
TESTING FOR VERACITY ONLINE AND OFFLINE
Letting our teenagers roam freely on the Internet, especially my daughter, was
a scary proposition for my wife and me. So I taught them some techniques I
used on suspects to determine their veracity. I did this to help protect them
from both online and real-world predators. I oﬀer these techniques to you for
the same reason, to help you guard against deceptive on- and oﬄine
communications. e results of these seeming innocuous veracity tests are not
absolute proof of deception but they do provide you with strong indicators
that someone might be lying or, at least, stretching the truth beyond acceptable
limits.
THE WELL . . . TECHNIQUE
When you ask someone a direct yes-or-no question and they begin their
answer with the “Well,” there is a high probability of deception. It indicates
that the person answering the question is about to give you an answer that they
know you are not expecting. e following exchanges will clarify the “Well”
technique.
DAD: Did you ﬁnish your homework?
DAUGHTER: Well . . .
DAD: Go to your room and ﬁnish your homework.
DAUGHTER: How did you know I didn’t do my homework?
DAD: I’m a dad. I know these things.
e dad didn’t need to wait for his daughter to ﬁnish her answer because he
knew by her use of “Well” in response to his direct question that she was about
to give him an answer she knew he was not expecting. e daughter knew her
dad was expecting a yes answer to the question “Did you do your homework?”
In another example, I interviewed a person who I thought witnessed a
murder. e person was in proximity to the crime scene, but he denied seeing
the shooting. After giving me some evasive answers, I decided to test his
veracity by asking him a direct yes-or-no question.
ME: Did you see what happened?
WITNESS: Well . . . from where I was it was hard to see much of anything. It was dark and it all
happened so fast.
I asked the witness a direct question to which he knew I expected a yes
answer. Since he began his response with “Well,” I knew he was about to give
me an answer other than yes. I let the witness ﬁnish his response so as not to
alert him to the technique.
e “Well” technique only works with direct yes-or-no questions.
Beginning a response with “Well” in answer to an open-ended question such as
“Who will win the Super Bowl next year?” indicates the person is evaluating
how to answer the question. You should allow others to ﬁnish their answers
before responding so as not to alert them to this technique. Be advised that if
the person you are talking to is aware of this technique, he or she will
deliberately avoid using “Well.”
Get into the habit of asking people a direct yes-or-no question and listening
for their response. Answering such a question with “Well” or not directly
answering the question is a strong indicator of deception, requiring additional
probing.
THE LAND OF IS
When people choose not to answer yes or no, they go to the Land of Is. e
Land of Is occupies the space between truth and deception. is murky area
contains a labyrinth of half-truths, excuses, and suppositions. President
Clinton’s now famous statement to the grand jury inspired the concept of the
Land of Is. To paraphrase what Clinton stated, “It depends upon what the
meaning of the word is is. If is means is, and never has been, that’s one thing, if
it means there is none, that was a completely true statement.” Clinton cleverly
took the prosecutor to the Land of Is to avoid directly answering the
prosecutor’s direct yes-or-no question.
e following exchange between a mother and daughter demonstrates the
Land of Is technique.
MOM: Your teacher called this afternoon and told me that she suspected you of cheating on an
exam. Did you cheat on your exam?
DAUGHTER: I spend two hours a night studying. I study more than anybody I know. People
who don’t study are the people who have to cheat on exams. I study all the time. Don’t accuse
me of cheating!
MOM: I’m not accusing you of cheating.
DAUGHTER: Yes, you are!
e mom asked her daughter a direct yes-or-no question. Her daughter
chose not to respond with a simple yes-or-no answer but, instead, took her
mother to the Land of Is to avoid directly answering it. e daughter ended
her response with an accusation, which put Mom on the defensive. e topic
was no longer about cheating but about Mom making unwarranted
accusations.
Mom could have prevented her daughter from going to the Land of Is by
ﬁrst recognizing that the technique was being used and then redirecting the
conversation back to the initial topic of inquiry. For example:
MOM: Your teacher called this afternoon and told me that she suspected you of cheating on an
exam. Did you cheat on your exam?
DAUGHTER: I spend two hours a night studying. I study more than anybody I know. People
who don’t study are the people who have to cheat on exams. I study all the time. Don’t accuse
me of cheating!
MOM: I know you study hard and get good grades. at’s not what I asked you. I asked you
whether or not you cheated on your exam. Did you cheat on your exam?
Redirecting the conversation back to the initial question forced her
daughter to answer the question, “Did you cheat on your exam?” Her daughter
must answer yes or no or take her mother back to the Land of Is. Failure to
answer a yes-or-no question with a yes-or-no answer is not conclusive proof of
deception, but the probability of deception does increase signiﬁcantly. If her
daughter did not cheat on her exam, answering no would not be diﬃcult. e
truth is simple. e truth is direct.  e truth is not complicated.
WHY SHOULD I BELIEVE YOU?
When someone provides you with an answer to a question, simply ask them
“Why should I believe you?” Honest people typically answer, “Because I am
telling the truth” or some derivation thereof. Truthful people simply convey
information. ey focus on accurately presenting facts. Conversely, liars try to
convince people that what is being said is true. eir focus is not on accurately
presenting facts, but rather, on convincing listeners that the facts presented
represent the truth. Since liars cannot rely on facts to establish their credibility,
they tend to bolster their credibility to make their version of the facts appear
believable.
When people answer with other than “Because I’m telling the truth” or
some derivation thereof, tell them that their response did not answer the
question and repeat the question, “Why should I believe you?” If they again do
not respond with “Because I’m telling the truth” or some derivation thereof,
the probability of deception increases. e following exchange between a dad
and his son demonstrates the Why Should I Believe You technique.
DAD: ere was ten dollars on my dresser this morning. It’s no longer there. Did you take
money from my dresser for any reason?
SON: No.
DAD: Son, I want to believe you. But I’m having a hard time. Tell me. Why should I believe
you?
SON: I’m not a thief.
DAD: I didn’t ask you if you were a thief or not. I asked you why I should believe you. Why
should I believe you?
SON: Because I didn’t steal the money. I’m telling you the truth.
DAD: I know you are and I believe you.
In this exchange, the son responded that he was not a thief. is response
did not answer the question “Why should I believe you?” Dad gave his son a
second chance by telling him that the question was not whether he was a thief
but rather “Why should I believe you?” is time the son answered, “Because I
didn’t steal the money. I’m telling you the truth,” which indicates the son was
probably telling the truth. e fact that the son correctly answered the
question “Why should I believe you” does not mean he told the truth, but it
does decrease the likelihood of deception.
When you communicate with people, especially on the Internet by instant
messaging or by texting on a smartphone, use these simple, noninvasive
techniques to test the person’s veracity. ese techniques are so subtle that the
people you are communicating with will not even recognize that they are being
tested for veracity. Although these techniques are only indicators of deception,
not proof of deception, they do provide you with a strong line of defense
against online predators.
DETECTING DECEPTION IN ONLINE PROF ILES
Most people do not accurately describe themselves in online proﬁles, especially
dating proﬁles. Researchers Toma, Hancock, and Ellison surveyed eighty
people who submitted online proﬁles to various dating websites. An
astounding 81 percent of the online daters lied about one or more of their
physical attributes, which included height, weight, and age. Women tended to
lie about their weight and men tended to lie about their height. Women whose
weight scored further from the mean lied more about their degree of obesity.
Likewise, men whose height scored further from the mean lied more about
how tall they were. e survey respondents reported that they were more likely
to lie about their photographs than in relationship information such as marital
status and the number of children they have.
In a follow-up study by Hancock and Toma, they found that about one-
third of the online photographs examined were not accurate. Women’s
photographs were judged as less accurate than men’s photographs. Women
were more likely to be older than they were portrayed in their photographs.
eir photographs were more likely to be Photoshopped or taken by
professional photographers. Additionally, less attractive people were more likely
to enhance their proﬁle. e most interesting ﬁnding was that although people
frequently lied in their online proﬁles, they attempted to keep their alterations
within believable parameters in the event they met their correspondents in
subsequent face-to-face meetings.
e magnitude of deception in online proﬁles should not come as a big
surprise. An online proﬁle is the equivalent of a ﬁrst date. Anyone who has
been on a ﬁrst date will remember putting his or her best foot forward. (Just as
in a ﬁrst job interview, we wear our “interview” suit.) Women dressed with
great contemplation and took extra minutes to put on their makeup. Men
ensured their clothes were color- coordinated and wrinkle-free. Conversations
were rehearsed before any words were exchanged. Personality ﬂaws and
behavioral quirks were carefully camouﬂaged with polite talk and impeccable
manners. e extra steps were taken to make the right ﬁrst impression.
Putting your best foot forward when meeting someone is not construed as
deception because the foot put forward still is recognizably yours, albeit an
enhanced version. People who present themselves on the Internet should try to
put a positive face on their proﬁle, but remain within the bounds of truth
when including a photograph and a description of who they are. Likewise,
people who use the Internet to search for potential relationships should learn
to take online proﬁles with a grain of salt, recognizing that the person they are
scrutinizing is never going to appear more attractive or qualiﬁed than the
picture and résumé they post.
Men and women feel the need to meet standards of beauty that society
establishes, and which are reinforced by the media. People lie to bring
themselves closer to the standard image in the hope of attracting a friend or a
mate. People who believe they do not meet those standards feel less attractive
and are less conﬁdent that they can attract and keep a partner without lying
about who they really are and how they really look. is pattern will not
change in the foreseeable future; to the contrary, it will most likely intensify as
online dating and Internet chat rooms become more popular and proliferate.
Anyone who seeks relationships on the Internet should be aware of the line
that separates a “best impression” proﬁle from a deceptive one. A deceptive
online proﬁle may attract a suitor or friend, but once the deception is
discovered, trust, disappointment, and betrayal becomes the centerpiece of the
relationship instead of excitement, hopes, and dreams. If you want to try
Internet relationship building, be honest in your online proﬁle and be patient.
e right relationship is worth the wait.
HOW TO REDUCE YOUR CHANCES OF BEING HOOK ED BY A CATPHISH
e ﬂit of an eye, the turn of the head, or a slight change in voice pitch
provides clues to a person’s personality, sincerity, and veracity. As cited earlier
in the book, our brains constantly monitor verbal and non verbal cues to assess
others to see if they pose a potential threat. If the cues are friend signals, then
the brain tends to ignore the behaviors. If the cues are foe signals, the brain
initiates the ﬁght or ﬂight response and we go shields up to protect ourselves
against the threat or potential threat.
Nonverbal and verbal cues can undergo dramatic changes from second to
second and from one word to the next. Monitoring these changes can mean
the diﬀerence between relationship happiness and relationship hell. People are
comfortable using verbal and nonverbal cues to assess others and rely heavily
on this method to protect themselves against initiating or continuing bad
relationships.
Internet relationships lack the cues necessary for people to make similar
judgments. Emoticons help decode written communications, but they are not
enough. Decoding an unseen person’s personality, sincerity, and veracity
requires additional skills when communicating on the Internet. People are
poor judges of their Internet partners because the cues they rely on in face-to-
face exchanges are missing. e most reliable method people have to assess
others is no longer available to them. ey must rely on unpracticed
techniques that have not yet been tested for reliability. e brain has not built
up enough data to discriminate between friend and foe signals embedded in
Internet communications. Building Internet detection skills takes time. Here
are some of the potential problems you might encounter in determining the
veracity and value of a potential online relationship.
TRUTH BIAS
People tend to believe others. is phenomenon, referred to as the truth bias,
allows society and commerce to run smoothly and eﬃciently. Absent the truth
bias, people would spend an inordinate amount of time checking data
collected from others. e truth bias also serves as a social default.
Relationships with friends and business colleagues would become strained if
their veracity were constantly questioned. Consequently, people typically
believe others until evidence to the contrary surfaces.
e truth bias provides liars with an advantage because people want to
believe what they hear, see, or read. e truth bias diminishes when people
become aware of the possibility of deception. e truth bias predisposes people
to believe what others write in emails and texts. Absent verbal and nonverbal
cues, the veracity of written communications is not as easily called into
question.
Another characteristic of the truth bias is that when people do see a few
loose ends or minor contradictions in a person’s story, they tend to excuse the
discrepancy because to do otherwise would call the person’s words or behaviors
into question. It’s easier to excuse away minor diﬀerences than to confront the
person. e best defense against the truth bias online is judicious skepticism
and use of the “competing hypotheses” technique (see the following page).
THE PRIMACY EFFECT
Truth bias creates the primacy eﬀect. e primacy eﬀect, as you will recall from
Chapter 3, creates a ﬁlter through which we view communication and events.
e primacy eﬀect does not change reality but alters people’s perception of it.
Truth bias creates a primacy ﬁlter. Anything a person writes tends to be
evaluated as truthful unless there is something to cause you to doubt what is
written. Absent verbal and nonverbal cues, individuals are at a disadvantage
when judging written correspondence on the Internet.
COMPETING HYPOTHESES
Developing competing hypotheses prevents the truth bias and the primacy
eﬀect from unduly undermining your ability to judge the character and
veracity of the person who is writing to you. Hypotheses are nothing more
than educated guesses. A competing hypothesis is an educated guess that
supposes a diﬀerent outcome based on the same or similar set of circumstances.
For example, say one hypothesis posits that the person who is writing to
you is genuine and telling the truth. A competing hypothesis posits that the
person who is writing to you is an imposter and a liar. During the course of
your written exchanges with another person on the Internet (for example, in
an instant message session) you should seek evidence to support your initial
hypothesis (the writer is genuine and truthful) or your competing hypothesis
(the writer is an imposter and a liar).
Rarely does all the evidence support the initial hypothesis or the competing
hypothesis, because honest people often say and do things that make them
look dishonest and, conversely, dishonest people often say and do things that
make them look honest. In the end, however, the weight of the evidence
should support one hypothesis over the other. Countering the eﬀects of truth
bias and the primacy eﬀect reduces your vulnerability to being deceived on the
Internet . . .  catphished, so to say.
LAWS OF ATTRACTION
As discussed in Chapter 4, attractive people receive preferential treatment and
garner more attention than do unattractive (or less attractive) individuals. e
eﬀect of physical beauty is reduced in Internet communications, unless a
picture accompanies an Internet proﬁle. Keep in mind that people often lie in
their Internet proﬁles to enhance their ability to attract partners. Since people
do not have face-to-face interaction with the person writing to them, they have
no point of reference against which to judge their written communication.
Contrast plays an important role in attraction. When two people stand side
by side, people tend to contrast one against the other. In the absence of a
second person for comparison purposes, an individual will tend to compare the
single person against their “idealized” person. Since the person writing to you
on the Internet is singular, you will have a tendency to compare that person
against your idealized person. Over time, people tend to attribute the
characteristic of their idealized person to the person writing them. is
misattribution leads to the increased probability of being the victim of a
catphish.
RAPPORT BUILDING
Building rapport on the Internet relies solely on written text, assuming no use
of Skype or other photographic transmission. is limits the techniques people
normally have available to establish rapport in face-to-face communications.
As mentioned earlier in the book, ﬁnding common ground is a powerful
technique to establish rapport. In order to ﬁnd common ground on the
Internet, you must disclose personal information to the person to whom you
are writing. Disclosing this kind of information is another powerful technique
to develop rapport. Since Internet communications are anonymous, people
tend to disclose more information, and do it more quickly, than they would
face-to-face. One reason for this is that the sender does not have verbal and
nonverbal cues to gain feedback about the acceptance or rejection of his or her
information by the receiver of the written information.
When people receive rejection cues in face-to-face communications, they
tend to stop disclosing. is is not the case online. In fact, people tend to
increase the disclosure of sensitive personal information. e result of an
increase in self-disclosure propels the relationship to a higher level than if the
relationship were a face-to-face encounter. As a result, a vital step in the
relationship developing process is skipped. During this vital step in face-to-face
communication, prospective partners have the opportunity to slowly disclose
information using verbal and nonverbal cues to pace the development of the
relationship and the rate of information release. If things go awry during this
initial step, the two people can go their separate ways without having disclosed
too much sensitive information to create personal vulnerabilities. Because of
the absence of this vital step in written Internet communication, where no
face-to-face interaction occurs, the chances for catphishing increase.
Recruiting people to spy for the United States follows a similar relationship
pathway. Spies need to be groomed. e steps required to develop close
friendships or romantic relationships are the same ones required to convince a
person to become a spy. In several cases, I tried to rush the relationship due to
operational demands. ese recruitments always failed because I skipped the
initial step in relationship development. e ﬁrst step is critical. Revealing too
much information too soon will dampen the relationship. e recruitment
target will disengage. As mentioned earlier, a partner is seen as too “fast” or too
“slow” if the expectation milestones for relationship development are hurried
or lagging. Internet relationships often violate relationship expectations
because partners are propelled to a higher level of relationship intensity before
they are psychologically prepared to do so. is creates vulnerabilities for both
partners to the interaction.
EMOTIONAL INVESTMENT
e longer the Internet relationship continues, the more likely people are to
remain in the relationship because of their deep emotional investment. is
doesn’t mean they are actually a good couple, but because they’ve spent too
much time in the interaction, they don’t feel they can just quit, and besides,
the relationship has developed to a point where the volume of sensitive
information released creates personal vulnerabilities so signiﬁcant that giving
up is not an option.
AN EXAMPLE OF HOW EMOTIONAL INVESTMENT WORKS IN THE REAL WORLD
To illustrate how emotional investment affects a person’s behavior, let me illustrate how you can use it to your
advantage in certain situations, particularly when buying big-ticket items. Let’s assume you want to purchase a
new car. In this case, you would ﬁrst ﬁnd the vehicle you want and then tell the salesperson that you will buy it
today if you can get it for the right price. Then take out your checkbook and write the date and name of the
dealership on a check. Explain to the salesperson all that’s required to wrap up the deal is the amount of the
down payment and your signature. This partially completed check sends a message to the salesperson that you
are serious about buying a car. State the price you want to pay and be ready to wait the salesperson out.
In one instance that I tried this, I negotiated eight hours for a vehicle! At the end of the salesperson’s shift,
she relented. She reasoned that she spent eight hours negotiating with me and to not sell me the car would be
a waste of her time, time she could have spent selling cars to other people. The emotional investment she put
into the negotiations psychologically pressured her into taking my ridiculously low offer; otherwise she would
have had to face the prospect of failure.
COGNITIVE DISSONANCE
Cognitive dissonance occurs when people hold two or more conﬂicting ideas
or beliefs simultaneously. People continue in Internet relationships when they
know the relationship should stop to avoid cognitive dissonance. ey do not
want to believe that the person they are communicating with is not who they
say they are, because that creates cognitive dissonance.
Take yourself as an example. You view yourself as a knowledgeable,
discerning person. You also love the person you have met and are
communicating with online. If you admit that you are the victim of
catphishing, then you are naïve and gullible; therefore, you refuse to believe
that the person you are writing to is a fraud, to avoid the bad feeling that
comes with cognitive dissonance.
Manti Te’o, the Notre Dame football player who fell victim to an online
predator, expressed the conﬂict caused by cognitive dissonance in this
comment about his catphishing experience: “is is incredibly embarrassing to
talk about, but over an extended period of time, I developed an emotional
relationship with a woman I met online. We maintained what I thought to be
an authentic relationship by communicating frequently online and on the
phone, and I grew to care deeply about her. To realize that I was the victim of
what was apparently someone’s sick joke and constant lies was, and is, painful
and  humiliating. . . . In retrospect, I obviously should have been much more
cautious. If anything good comes of this, I hope it is that others will be far
more guarded when they engage with people online than I was.”
EXPOSING CATPHISH
To prevent yourself from being hooked by a catphish, force him or her into the
visual world, where you can use your well-honed knowledge of nonverbal
signals to verify if the person matches up with their online persona and if the
relationship looks as good “in the light of day” as it did on a computer screen.
During the early stages of an Internet relationship, you must realize that the
lack of nonverbal cues puts you at a disadvantage. Establish competing
hypotheses to prevent the relationship from developing too fast.
Always assume that you are the victim of a catphish until visual evidence
proves otherwise. Insist on a face-to-face meeting as soon as possible. is
meeting should take place in a well-populated, public area to reduce the
possibility of personal danger. Also, to make the meeting more comfortable for
both Internet users, a casual, relatively short ﬁrst face-to-face meeting is
recommended; a coﬀee shop rendezvous or lunch date might be best.
In the event a face-to-face meeting is not practical, insist on a visual
meeting on Skype or similar service. An Internet partner who makes excuses to
avoid a face-to-face meeting, or constantly makes excuses as to why a visual
meeting on the Internet is not possible, is sending a strong signal that
something is amiss. At this point, you should immediately break oﬀ your
Internet relationship. To do otherwise puts you in peril, possibly signiﬁcant
peril.
Demanding a visual meeting early in the relationship is a simple yet
eﬀective technique to avoid being hooked by a catphish. Visual meetings allow
you to evaluate nonverbal cues to assess the veracity of your Internet partner.
Visual contact also prevents the development of idealized characteristics to an
unknown person. Developing competing hypotheses reduces the eﬀect of truth
bias. e need to reveal sensitive, personal information is reduced in face-to-
face encounters, thus preventing the relationships from developing too quickly.
Slowing the development of the relationship reduces your emotional
investment, thus minimizing the emotional cost of breaking oﬀ the
relationship.
In genuine relationships, people are eager to communicate visually,
especially early in a relationship. People feel more comfortable in visual
relationships because they can use the social skills they have come to rely on to
evaluate others more accurately. Visual meetings expose catphish and level the
Internet relationship playing ﬁeld.
A NEW GENERATION: TURN ON, TUNE IN, AND TAKE PRECAUTIONS
ere is simply no denying that the advent of person-to-person online
communication has dramatically altered the landscape of seeking friends and
building relationships. As online interaction continues to grow in popularity it
will have an even greater impact on the way people form relationships in the
years to come.
By being aware of the Internet dangers mentioned above, and using the
techniques I recommend to minimize them, meaningful Internet relationships
are possible. In fact, for reasons listed at the beginning of this chapter, they
might be the preferred method for connecting with people in the initial stage
of relationship building.
Used with appropriate caution and common sense, the Internet is another
tool in your friendship toolbox for ﬁnding and developing friendships for a
moment or a lifetime. Conversely, if you use the tool carelessly, with a
disregard for what is inputted and downloaded, it can lead to disappointment
and potential personal disasters. In the ﬁnal analysis, how you use the digital
universe will determine its ultimate value, good or bad, in shaping the quality
of your life and your relationships.
EPILOGUE
The Friendship Formula in Practice
And as every spy knows, common enemies are how allies always begin.
—ALLY CARTER, DON’T JUDGE A GIRL BY HER COVER
Here is one ﬁnal spy story. is one didn’t involve my time at the FBI; in fact,
it is more than a hundred years old.I e story begins at the turn of the last
century, when a German prince had a romantic rendezvous with a woman of
royalty from England. e sexual nature of the rendezvous was not that
disturbing to the German government; however, they were extremely unhappy
when they discovered the prince had written his paramour love letters ﬁlled
with state secrets. ey turned to “Dr. Graves,” a talented German spy, and
gave him his marching orders: “Get those letters back!”
And so he did. He traveled to England to meet this woman and reclaim the
prince’s love letters for his homeland. Printed on the following pages are
excerpts from Dr. Graves’s diary explaining how he accomplished his mission.
As you read the material, see if you can identify the Like Switch strategies Dr.
Graves utilized to successfully retrieve the letters.
I quartered myself at ﬁrst at the Russell Square Hotel, in a few days
transferring to the patrician Langham. I began by making tentative
inquiries. I purchased all society papers which I read from cover to cover,
and then carefully feeling my way put further questions that would locate
the set in which my lady was a central ﬁgure. From acquaintances I made
around the hotel, from the society reporters of newspapers, I began to get
little scraps of information. Fortunately, it was the season in London and
everybody was coming into town. I soon knew who the Lady’s intimates
were and their favorite rendezvous. e next step was to become familiar
with the personality of the lady and to gain some idea as to her habits and
her likes and dislikes. I heard that the lady was in the habit of going
horseback riding in Hyde Park. Every day I made it my business to take a
two hour canter along the bridle path. My patience was rewarded on the
ﬁfth morning for I saw her galloping by with a party of friends.
e next morning I was on the bridle path at the same hour. Finally,
she came galloping along with the same group, and after they had almost
gone from sight, I galloped after them. I found out where they kept their
horses and after they had dismounted, I sauntered up to the stable and
made inquiries. I learned that they always went out at the same time of
day. ereafter, I made it my business to pass the lady on the bridle path
day after day. I pride myself on few things, but my horsemanship is one
of them. Many a hard tussle and bleeding nose I got riding Brumbies
(wild horses) across the wild tracks of Australia. I also learned a trick or
two among my Tuareg friends, which I exhibited for the lady’s beneﬁt on
various occasions. I did not hope to gain an introduction, but only to
attract attention and familiarize her party with my appearance, applying
one of the test points of human psychology. I employed the theory of the
subconscious attraction of an oft seen though unknown face.
I soon ascertained that my lady and her friends followed all the whims
of London society. One in particular interested me. ey were in the
habit of frequenting Carlton Terrace between three and four every
afternoon and eating strawberries. I also went to eat straw berries.
Carlton Terrace during the strawberry season is an exquisitely colored
fashion plate of life’s butterﬂies and drones. is throng of fashion and
beauty, marked with its air of distinction carelessly abandoned to
pleasure, ever murmuring pleasant nothings and tossing light persiﬂage
from table to table, is truly an interesting study of the lighter sides of life.
One sits on a magniﬁcent marquee-covered glass enclosed terrace
overlooking the ames with its ever changing scenes of fussy tugs and
squat barges.
At Carlton Terrace one pays well for the subtleties of eating. By
courteous consideration of the waitresses, I managed to secure a much
coveted outside corner table near to the one reserved for the lady and her
party. I always made it a point to withhold my entrance until the lady was
in the terrace; then I would stroll in alone, take a seat alone, and show a
desire to be alone. ey have a very clever way of serving strawberries at
the Carlton. A vine growing from ten to twelve large luscious berries is
brought on in a silver pot. It is the acme of luxury. You pick the fresh
berries from the vine on your table, the Terrace supplies quantities of
cream, and you pay half a sovereign—$2.50—f or a dish of strawberries.
One dish is enough for the average customer. Every afternoon I ordered
ﬁve.
Day after day, I consumed in strawberries two sovereigns and a half—
$12.50—of the Grand Duke of Mecklenburg-Schwerein’s money. Always
tipping the girl a half sovereign which made my daily strawberry bill
come up to three sovereigns ($15). For about ten days, I did this always at
the same time; always being careful to make my entrance after the lady’s
party was seated, always ordering the same number of portions, always
giving the girl the same tip. It wasn’t long before I began to be observed. I
soon saw that not only the attendants but also the patrons of the Terrace
were becoming interested in my foible. One day as I passed, I heard
someone say, “Here comes the strawberry ﬁend.”
I was satisﬁed. I knew it would be easy now to eﬀect an entrance to
the lady’s set. I had been marked as something out of the usual in the
restaurant that from three to four in the afternoon at that time of the year
is the most fashionable in London. Now, a woman like my lady does not
ﬂirt. If you glance at her under favorable conditions such as my
strawberry “stunt” had created for me she will return the glance. You both
half smile and do not look at each other again that afternoon. at is not
ﬂirting. Splitting hairs, we shall call it psychic interest.
I continued my strawberry festival and one day a manager of Carlton
Terrace told me that people were making inquiries about me. Several men
had wanted to know who I was. Under questioning, he told me that one
of the men was a member of the lady’s set. It was easy to put together two
and two. Obviously, the inquiry had been inspired by her.
Meanwhile I had sent several communications to the Grand Duke,
insisting that pressure be brought to bear upon his nephew and to keep
him away from London; not even permitting him under penalty of
stopping his allowance, to write the lady in the case until the Grand Duke
gave his permission. By now, London had gradually ﬁlled and the season
was at its height. I went the rounds of the theaters from Drury Lane to
the Empire and I visited the clubs. I found here men whom I had met
previously and presently I rounded up two or three fellows with whom I
had been fairly intimate at one time or another on hunting expeditions
and at continental watering places. I made them introduce me to diﬀerent
sets. Dexterous maneuvering obtained me invitations to afternoon teas
and at-homes in the same circle frequented by my lady.
I was introduced to her at an afternoon reception. She was a typical
outdoor Englishwoman. Not particularly handsome, but possessing to the
full the clearness of skin and eyes and strong virile health, that is the
hereditary lien of Albion’s daughters. Tall, willowy, and strong, of free and
independent manners and habits, she was the direct antithesis of the usual
German woman. I reasoned that this was probably the reason of the
young Duke’s infatuation.
“How do you do you wild Colonial boy. Still as fond of straw berries as
ever?”
We both burst out laughing.
“So your ladyship observed and classiﬁed my little maneuvers.”
“Of course,” she said with a toss of her head.
Unforced and pleasant chatting followed. I could more and more
understand the Grand Duke’s infatuation; in fact, considered him quite a
“deuced, lucky beggar.”
From that day on, I made it a point to be present whenever she
attended public places, such as the theater, concerts, or restaurants.
Gradually and imperceptibly by little services here and there I won her
conﬁdence. ere was an after-theater supper in the Indian room of the
Windsor, and I was invited. By this time, people had come to know
something about me. I was a globe-trotter, a man of leisure, interested as
a hobby in research work in medicine. I discovered that her aﬀair with the
young Grand Duke was a fairly open secret in her set; also, that she was
expecting him in London almost daily. Gradually I hinted that I knew the
young Grand Duke. As I gained her conﬁdence further, I invented
amorous aﬀairs for him and hinted to her about them. In this way, I
ﬁnally managed to induce her to talk. Subtly I instilled a vague
resentment against him, which was accentuated by his non-appearance in
London society up to now. His Highness having been kept away by his
Serene Uncle, the serene one having been cautioned to do so by me.
Two months passed before I was invited to the lady’s home in Mayfair
and by that time partly because I pretended to know the young Grand
Duke, I was on a more intimate footing. I had learned that she had met
him at a hunting party at the Earl of Crewes’ shooting box in Shropshire.
Later, she intimated that this was but their oﬃcial meeting and that their
acquaintance actually dated from a mountain trip she had taken to
Switzerland, the universal playground of royalty traveling incog. I learned
too that her heavy bridge gambling had cost her a lot of money.
e information that the lady was in debt did not come easily. To
obtain it, I had to work on her maid. Whenever the occasion arose, I
made it my business to tip the maid liberally. I contrived to do a number
of little things for her. Knowing the lady to be out, I called at the house
one day and while pretending to be waiting for my hostess, I put some
leading questions to the maid. I learned that her mistress was pressed for
money. at was an opening worth working on.
ereafter, I contrived to be present whenever there was a bridge party
at the lady’s. ey are pretty high gamblers, those English society women,
and I came to see that the lady was generally a heavy loser. It was my
good fortune for her to lose to me one night. Now, it is the custom at
these gatherings not to hand over cash; instead, the unlucky one pays
with what corresponds to an “on demand note.” I took her note that
night and with others—the whereabouts of which I learned from the
maid and which I indirectly purchased from the holders—I took all these
to a notorious money-lender and made a deal with him. He was to take
the notes and press the lady for payment, of course keeping my name out
of it. It is obvious that, trying, as I was to win her conﬁdence, I could not
go myself and hold these obligations over her head. at same day the
money-lender paid the lady a call. He paid her a good many other calls,
harassing her, threatening legal action and driving her until she was
almost to a state of nervous collapse. Well-placed sympathies soon made
her talk and she burst out pettishly that she was in debt and that most of
her acquaintances were in debt—nothing unusual in that set.
is was an opportune chance to be of material beneﬁt to the lady.
Seriously, we talked over her aﬀairs. I found them pretty well entangled.
We discussed the young Grand Duke. I gradually persuaded her that
there was no hope of a legitimate marriage with the house of
Mecklenburg-Schwerein, but because of her association with the young
Grand Duke and the fact that she had been betrothed to him, it was only
right that the Duchy provide her with some means of assistance. e ice
was perilously thin, for the lady is a high-spirited woman of ideals and I
had to be careful to word my language so that it would not appear as
though she were blackmailing. In justice to her, I believe that if she had
taken that view of it she would have dropped the entire matter and retired
from society for the season rather than go through with my plan. Finally,
I said, “Have you any means by which you could compel the ducal house
to make adequate acknowledgments and redresses to you?”
After a long hesitation, she jumped up, swept from the room, and
returned presently with a handful of letters. I saw on some of them the
Grand Duke’s coat of arms. e young fool had been careless enough for
that! She shook the letters in a temper and cried, “I wonder what Franz’s
uncle would say to these? Why I could compel him to marry me.”
Here was the chance. e iron—in this case my lady’s  temper—was
hot. I suggested that we sit down and talk it over. As an introductory
attack, to create the impression that I knew what I was talking about, I
hinted that I was connected with a leading family in Germany and that I
was in London incog. I approached the situation from the viewpoint that
I was her friend, not a friend of the house of Mecklenburg-Schwerein, bu t
that, by knowing them and their ways, I could be of great assistance to
her.
“It is regrettable,” I consoled; “but you have no chance for a legitimate,
even a morganatic alliance with the young Grand Duke. I consider their
entire attitude toward you utterly unfair. In view of your understanding
with him, you are most certainly entitled to adequate recompense from
his house. If you went into court you could obtain this on grounds of
breach of promise, but I can understand your feelings. Such a step would
only cast odium upon an old and noble family such as yours.”
at seemed to her liking.
“But what can I do?” she said.
“In view of my friendship for you,” I told her, “I would consider it an
honor if you would permit me to act on your behalf. I think I can
negotiate with the young Grand Duke’s uncle and I promise that he will
regard the matter in a fair light. I appreciate the extreme delicacy of the
situation and you must observe the necessity of a man handling this
aﬀair.”
She shook her head and tapped the letters nervously.
“No. It is intolerable,” she said. “Not to be thought of.”
I saw that I had to make it stronger. I thereupon invented the most
ingenious lie it has ever been given me to tell. In about ﬁve minutes I had
painted the young Grand Duke in such colors that the adventures of Don
Juan were saintly compared to the escapades of his ducal highness.
“Why consider it yourself,” I said. “He was to be over here with you
during the season. He has not come. You told me yourself that he has not
even answered your letters. Well that’s all there is to it. Your ladyship, he
and his house deserve any punishment that you can visit upon them.”
e idea of punishment appealed where the other had failed. e
outraged pride of a woman, especially an Englishwoman, is a terrible
thing. Soon after that I made haste to take my leave. At my quarters I
wrote two letters to myself and signed the Grand Duke’s name to them.
In these I oﬀered to pay her ladyship’s debts. ey were addressed to me
and after allowing a reasonable time to elapse, I again went out to Mayfair
and read them to her. She was now cold and hard and gave me full
permission to go ahead and make any arrangements I deemed advisable. I
thereupon went to the Grand Duke’s bank in London and notiﬁed them
that I must have 15,000 pounds ($75,000) . In four days I had the money.
e rest of the transaction was commonplace. She handed over all the
letters and documents and I gave her the 15,000 pounds. I know today
that her ladyship travels extensively in a very comfortable manner on the
yearly appanage allowed her by the old Grand Duke. I do not know
whether she still goes to Carlton Terrace to eat strawberries, but I ﬂatter
myself that her present good fortune is partially due to the fact that she
once went there.
HOW DR. GRAVES ACCOMPLISHED HIS MISSION
It is truly remarkable, when reading Dr. Graves’s diary, to realize this man was
a full century ahead of his time in using behavioral analysis and psychological
techniques to achieve his objective. If you take the time to reread the portion
of Chapter 1 detailing how the Friendship Formula was used to entice
“Seagull” to betray his country and become a spy for the United States, you
will be amazed at the parallels between the strategies employed by the FBI and
Dr. Graves in their work. Consider them:
1. In both cases, recruiting their targets was a well-choreographed plan that was executed over an
extended period of time. Both agents used the techniques presented in this book to predispose
their targets to like them prior to their ﬁrst meetings.
2. Dr. Graves, like the FBI agent Charles, used the Friendship Formula to establish a relationship
with the English lady. First they established proximity with their targets followed by an increase
in frequency and duration, and gradually introduced intensity, curiosity hooks, and
increasingly more intense nonverbal cues.
3. In both cases, the principle of proximity was used to establish nonthreatening contact between
the agent and the target (Chapter 1). In Seagull’s case, the FBI agent took pains to place
himself in public places where Seagull walked and would be aware of his presence. In Dr.
Graves’s case, he did the same by establishing proximity with his target on the riding trails and
seating himself at a table close to the one where his target routinely sat in the restaurant.
4. In both cases, the principles of frequency and duration were also utilized. With Seagull that
involved the FBI agent positioning himself on Seagull’s shopping route in a manner that
increased the number of instances (frequency), where the foreign diplomat saw him and
adding duration by following Seagull into the grocery store, extending the contact time
between the two men. With the English Lady, Dr. Graves increased frequency by the number
of times he passed the woman on the riding trails and saw her in the restaurant. Dr. Graves
even pointed out the power of frequency when he wrote, “I employed the theory of the
subconscious attraction of an oft seen though unknown face.” To achieve duration, he
extended contact time by being around the woman at additional public places, like the theater
and concerts. e more time (duration) you spend with people, the more you are able to
inﬂuence their decision-making process and thought patterns.
5. In both cases intensity was achieved through the use of nonverbal cues and a “curiosity hook.”
e constant presence of a stranger being around Seagull and the English lady aroused their
curiosity. In the case of Dr. Graves, the “Strawberry Stunt” served as a curiosity hook. What
type of man eats ﬁve servings of strawberries in one sitting and gives the waitstaﬀ such a large a
tip? Who was this person? What did he want? is curiosity motivated both Seagull and the
English lady to make an eﬀort to discover who Charles (the FBI agent) and Graves (the
German spy) were and what they wanted. Dr. Graves noted, “If you glance at her under
favorable conditions such as my strawberry ‘stunt’ had created for me [increased intensity], she
will return the glance. You both half smile and do not look at each other again that afternoon.”
When Dr. Graves ﬁrst met the lady, she displayed a “hair ﬂip” (the toss of her head), which is a
friend signal indicating that Dr. Graves established some degree of rapport before their ﬁrst
words were spoken. Both Charles and Graves had conﬁdence in the psychological principles
they employed and allowed time for them to work. ey did not rush the development of the
relationship. Instead, they let the relationships develop naturally over time, as “normal”
relationships would.
6. In both cases, Dr. Graves and the Special Agent used friend signals to present themselves as
nonthreatening (see Chapter 1), thus preventing their targets from going shields up when the
ﬁrst meetings took place. e Special Agent did not approach Seagull until he was comfortable
with the agent’s presence. Dr. Graves sat alone in the restaurant and showed no desire to meet
anyone, giving the illusion that he was not a threat. Dr. Graves also ensured that he was
noticed by walking in after the lady and her friends were already seated.
7. In both cases, information was gathered about their targets from various sources. In the Seagull
case, the agent received information from FBI analysts. In the case of Dr. Graves, he read local
newspapers, society pages, spoke with reporters, and later the groomsmen at the stables to
obtain information about his target. In both cases, vital information was gathered
surreptitiously to discover the things that motivate the targets to act as they do, to assess their
personalities, and to learn about the things that could be used to establish common ground.
Dr. Graves used elicitation techniques (see Chapter 6) to obtain sensitive information about his
target without alerting the elicitation sources to the fact that they were providing sensitive
information.
8. Dr. Graves went to the Carlton Terrace not only to be close to his target but also to establish
common ground by eating strawberries every day like his target did.
9. Dr. Graves took advantage of the psychological principle of misattribution (see Chapter 4) to
predispose the lady to like him. Horseback riding, like other exercises, triggers an endorphin
release, which makes people feel good about themselves. If there is no apparent reason for that
good feeling, people tend to attribute their good feeling to the people nearest to them.
According the Golden Rule of Friendship, if you want people to like you, make them feel good
about themselves. Dr. Graves was fostering rapport before he even said a word to his target.
10. In the end, Dr. Graves made it appear that it was the lady’s idea to exchange the letters for her
accrued debt, not Dr. Graves’s idea. In Seagull’s case, he watered and fertilized the seed of
treason planted by the FBI agent. is is the true sign of a successful operation.
e two spy stories, separated by a century, remind us that human nature is
a constant and that friends can be made if you are willing to use the tools
presented in this book to ﬂip the Like Switch and turn people on to you.
I. A. K. Graves, e Secrets of the German War Oﬃce (New York: McBride, Nast, 1914).
APPENDIX
Answers to “What Do You See” Quiz (page 181)
Picture 1: e foe signal depicted in the photo is the young lady yawning.
However, this signal might not indicate that the young lady is bored with the
young man. You should use an empathic statement to discover the source of
her yawn.
Picture 2: e three friend signals depicted in the photo are (a) full smile; (b)
head tilt; (c) mutual gaze. Also appropriate: (d) Open body posture.
Picture 3: e additional friend signal not found in picture #2 is the “palms up”
displays in both the young man and woman.
Picture 4: e asynchronous posture between the two individuals signals poor
rapport.
Picture 5: e young lady is leaning in and smiling, indicating interest; however,
the young man, with his armed crossed and leaning backward, signals he is not
interested in her.
Picture 6: e young man, smiling and leaning forward, indicates interest in the
young lady, who, by her closed body posture (arms crossed) and skeptical eye
signal, does not share his interest.
Picture 7: e friend signal indicating good rapport is “preening” (grooming your
partner). In this case, it is the young lady straightening the collar of the young
man’s shirt.
Picture 8: e young man is interested in the young lady based on his full smile
and leaning-in, open posture. Unfortunately, based on the young lady’s torso
position, she probably doesn’t share the young man’s feelings, although in this
case one would want to see a bit more of the girl’s nonverbal behaviors before
ruling out any possible interest.
Picture 9: e rapport between the two individuals is very good. is can be seen
in the (a) shared enthusiasm; (b) torso positioning: inward lean and open; (c)
expressive gestures (including “thumbs-up” sign); (d) prolonged eye contact;
and (e) smiles.
Picture 10: At ﬁrst glance, it looks like the young man is in charge because he is
pointing his ﬁnger. However, note that he is leaning backward. (Pointing a
ﬁnger at someone while leaning backward is counterintuitive, you don’t stick
your ﬁnger in someone’s face and lean away if you feel you’re in charge.) e
young lady is displaying “arms akimbo” (an aggressive nonverbal signal) in an
attempt to make up for the young man’s height advantage. e young lady has
her head tilted, with the carotid artery exposed, signaling that she is not afraid
of the young man. Diagnosis: e young man is on the losing end of this
interaction based on his backward lean and the young lady’s nonverbal
posturing, which indicates a lack of fear based on her aggressive stance.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
I would like to express my appreciation to Dave and Lynda Mills of Dave Mills
Photography in Lancaster, California, for taking the photographs in this book.
Both Dave and Lynda graciously contributed their photographic skills to
provide accurate depictions of selected techniques presented in these pages. I
would like to thank Andrew Cardone and my daughter, Brooke Schafer, for
volunteering their time and talent to serve as models for the photographs in
this book. I would like to thank Jenny Chaney, L. Michael Wells, Daniel
Potter, Cory Garza, and Tony DeCicco for reviewing the manuscript and
oﬀering their comments and suggestions. I would also like to thank Randy
Marcoz, whom I have worked with for many years teaching and developing
new ideas to enhance people’s communication skills. A special thanks to Mike
Dilley, author and historian, whom I have worked with for many years
developing and perfecting the many techniques presented in this book. He also
reviewed and edited the manuscript and provided invaluable advice in crafting
the ﬁnal draft. I would also like to acknowledge the eﬀorts of my English
teachers throughout my educational career, who had the courage to identify
the weakness in my writing and the patience to help me strengthen my writing
skills.
JACK SCHAFER
I have been blessed with wonderful people who have provided me with
encouragement, inspiration, and insight when I needed it most. I would like to
recognize them here—alphabetically—and thank each one for adding meaning
and joy to my life. If I have inadvertently overlooked anyone, my sincerest
apologies.
Lewis Andrews, Alan and Susan Balfour, Loretta Barrett, Ann and Steve
Batchelor, Lyle Berman, Carole Bloch, Stephanie Boyer, Avery Cardoza, C. T.
Chan, Grace Chock, Cynthia Cohen, Don Delitz, Alex DeSilva, Maurice
DeVaz, Jim Doyle, Julio and Carmen Enriquez, Burt, Barbara and Daniel
Friedman, Sally Fuller, Jean Golden, John Gollehon, Jan Gordon, David and
Odean Hargis, Steve Harris, Phil Hellmuth, Paulette and Kevin Herbert, Tom
Johnson, Grace Jones, Sandra Karlins, Miriam and Arnold Karlins, Robert
Kindya, Jerry Koehler, Albert Koh, Freddie Koh, Ray Kuik, Jim Levine, Len-  
McCully, Rob Mercado, Debra Miceli, Chad Michaels, Peter Miller, Joe
Navarro, Jacqueline O’Steen, Fran Regin, Maryanne Rouse, John Russell,
Wallace Russell, Harry, Jeannie, Libby and Molly Schroder, Steven Schussler,
Mike Shackleford, Stan Sludikoﬀ, Joan and Eric Steadman, Gary Walters,
Annette, Jill and Michelle Weinberg, Robert Welker, Tom Wheelen, Ken
VanVoorhis, and Anthony Vitale.
Finally, Jack and I want to extend a special thanks to Matthew Benjamin—
our editor extraordinaire—and all the other wonderful people at Simon &
Schuster who contributed mightily to making this manuscript all it could be.
MARVIN KARLINS
ABOUT THE AUTHORS
JOHN R. “JACK” SCHAFER, PH.D., is a psychologist, professor, intelligence consultant, and
former FBI Special Agent. Dr. Schafer spent ﬁfteen years conducting
counterintelligence and counterterrorism investigations, and seven years as a
behavioral analyst for the FBI’s National Security Division’s Behavioral
Analysis Program. He developed spy recruitment techniques, interviewed
terrorists, and trained agents in the art of interrogation and persuasion. Dr.
Schafer contributes online pieces for Psychology Today magazine, has authored
or coauthored six books, and has published numerous articles in professional
and popular journals. He is a professor with the School of Law Enforcement
and Criminal Justice at Western Illinois University.
MARVIN KARLINS received his Ph.D. in psychology from Princeton University and is
currently Professor of Management at the University of South Florida’s College
of Business Administration. Dr. Karlins consults internationally on issues of
interpersonal eﬀectiveness and has also authored twenty-four books, including
two national bestsellers, What Every BODY Is Saying and It’s a Jungle in ere.
He resides in Riverview, Florida, with his wife, Edyth, and daughter, Amber.
SimonandSchuster.com
authors.simonandschuster.com/John-R-Jack-Schafer
authors.simonandschuster.com/Marvin-Karlins
 Facebook.com/TouchstoneBooks
 @TouchstoneBooks
We hope you enjoyed reading this Touchstone eBook.
Join our mailing list and get updates on new releases, deals, bonus content and other great books from
Touchstone and Simon & Schuster.
CLICK HERE TO SIGN UP
or visit us online to sign up at
eBookNews.SimonandSchuster.com
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Ajzen, I. (1977). Information processing approaches to interpersonal attraction. In S. W. Duck (ed.),
eory and practice in interpersonal attraction (pp. 51–77). San Diego, CA: Academic Press.
Antheunis, M. L., Valkenburg, P. M., & Peter, J. (2007). Computer-mediated communication and
interpersonal attraction: An experimental test of two explanatory hypotheses. Cyberpsychology and
Behavior, 10, 831–835.
Aristotle (1999). Rhetoric (W. R. Roberts, trans.). In Library of the  Future, 4th ed. [CD-ROM]. Irvine,
CA: World Library.
Aronson, E. (1969). e theory of cognitive dissonance: A current perspective. In L. Berkowitz (ed.),
Advances in experimental psychology, vol. 4. New York: Academic Press.
Asch, S. E. (1946). Forming impressions of personality. Journal of  Abnormal and Social Psychology, 41,
303–314.
Aubuchon, N. (1997). e anatomy of persuasion. New York: American Management Association.
Balderston, N. L., Schultz, D. H., & Helmstetter, F. J. (2013). e eﬀect of threat on novelty-evoked
amygdala response. PloS ONE, 8, 1–10.
Ballenson, J. N., Blascovich, J., Beall, A. C., & Loomis, J. M. (2001). Equilibrium theory revisited:
Mutual gaze and personal space in virtual environments. Presence, 10, 583–598.
Barrick, J., Distin, S. L., Giluk, T. L., Stewart, G. L., Shaﬀer, J. A., & Swider, B. W. (2012). Candidate
characteristics driving initial impressions during rapport building: Implications for employment
interview validity. Journal of Occupational and Organizational Psychology, 85, 330–352.
Brady, E., & George, R. (2013). Manti Te’o’s “Catﬁsh” story is a common one. USA Today, January 18.
Branham, M. (2005). How and why do ﬁreﬂies light up? Scientiﬁc American, September 5.
Buﬀardi, L., & Campbell, W. K. (2008). Narcissism and social networking web sites. Personality and
Social Psychology Bulletin, 34, 1303–1314.
Byrne, D. (1969). Attitudes and attraction. In L. Berkowitz (ed.), Advances in Experimental Psychology, vol.
4. New York: Academic Press.
Carlzon, J. (1989). Moments of truth. New York: Harper Business.
Carnegie, D. (2011). How to win friends and inﬂuence people. New York: Simon & Schuster.
Carter, R. (1998). Mapping the mind. Berkeley: University of California Press.
Chaplin, W. F., Phillips, J. B., Brown, J. D., Claton, N. R., & Stein, J. L. (2000). Handshaking, gender
personality and ﬁrst impressions. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 79, 110–117.
Chen, F. F., & Kenrick, D. T. (2002). Repulsion or attraction? Group membership and assumed attitude
similarity. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 83, 111–125.
Cialdini, R. B. (1993). Inﬂuence: e psychology of persuasion. New York: William Morrow.
Clark, M. S., Mills, J. R., & Corcoran, D. M. (1989). Keeping track of needs and inputs of friends and
strangers. Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 15, 533–542.
Clore, G., Wiggens, N. H., & Itkin, S. (1975). Gain and loss in attraction: Attributions from nonverbal
behavior. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 31, 706–712.
Collins, N. L., & Miller, L. C. (1994). Self-disclosure and liking: A meta-analytic review. Psychological
Bulletin, 116, 457–475.
Craig, E., & Wright, K. B. (2012). Computer-mediated relational development and maintenance on
Facebook. Communication Research Reports, 29 (2), 118–129.
Curtis, R. C., & Miller, K. (1986). Believing another likes or dislikes you: Behavior making the beliefs
come true. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 51, 284–290.
Dalto, C. A., Ajzen, I., & Kaplan, K. J. (1979). Self-disclosure and attraction: Eﬀects of intimacy and
desirability of beliefs and attitudes. Journal of Research in Personality, 13, 127–138.
Davis, J. D., & Sloan, M. L. (1974). e basis of interviewee matching and interviewer self-disclosure.
British Journal of Social and Clinical Psychology, 13, 359–367.
DePaulo, B. M. (1992). Nonverbal behavior and self-presentation. Psychological Bulletin, 111, 203–243.
DeMaris, A. (2009). Distal and proximal inﬂuences of the risk of extra marital sex: A prospective study of
longer duration marriages. Journal of Sex Research, 44, 597–607.
Dimitrius, J., & Mazzarella, M. (1999). Reading people: How to understand people and predict their
behavior—anytime, anyplace. New York: Ballantine.
Egan, G. (1975). e skilled helper. Monterey, CA: Brooks/Cole.
Ekman, P., Friesen, W. V., & Ancoli, S. (1980). Facial signs of emotional experience. Journal of Personality
and Social Psychology, 39, 1125–1134.
Festinger, L. (1957). A theory of cognitive dissonance. Oxford, UK: Peterson Row.
Finkelstein, S. (2013). Building trust in less than 10 minutes. Huﬃngton Post, July 18.
Frank, M. G., Ekman, P., & Friesen, W. V. (1993). Behavioral markers and recognizability of the smile of
enjoyment. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 64, 83–93.
Franklin, B. (1916). e autobiography of Benjamin Franklin (J. Bigelow, ed.). New York: G. P. Putnam’s
Sons.
Gagne, F., Khan, A. Lydon, J., & To, M. (2008). When ﬂattery gets you nowhere: Discounting positive
feedback as a relationship maintenance strategy. Canadian Journal of Behavioral Science, 40, 59–68.
Givens, D. G. (2014). e nonverbal dictionary of gestures, signs and body language cues. Spokane, WA:
Center for Nonverbal Studies. Online at http://www.center-for-nonverbal-studies.org/6101.html.
Gold, J. A., Ryckman, R. M., & Mosley, N. R. (1984). Romantic mood induction and attraction to a
dissimilar other: Is love blind? Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 10, 358–368.
Grammar, K, J., Schmitt, A., & Massano, A. H. (1999). Fuzziness of nonverbal courtship
communication unblurred by motion energy detection. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 77,
487–508.
Grant, M. K., Fabrigar, L. R., & Lim, H. (2010). Exploring the eﬃcacy of compliments as a tactic for
securing compliance. Basic and Applied Social Psychology, 32, 226–233.
Greville, H. (1886). Cleopatra. Boston: Ticknor.
Griﬀeth, R. W., Vecchiok, R. P., & Logan, J. W. (1989). Equity theory and interpersonal attraction.
Journal of Applied Psychology, 74, 394–401.
Gueguen, N. (2008). e eﬀect of a woman’s smile on men’s courtship behavior. Social Behavior and
Personality, 36, 1233–1236.
Gueguen, N. (2010). e eﬀect of a woman’s incidental tactile contact on men’s later behavior. Social
Behavior and Personality, 38, 257–266.
Gueguen, N. (2010). Men’s sense of humor and women’s responses to courtship solicitations: An
experimental ﬁeld study. Psychological Reports, 107, 145–156.
Gueguen, N., Boulbry, G., & Selmi, S. (2009). “Love is in the air”: Congruency between background
music and goods in a ﬂower shop. International Review of Retail, Distribution and Consumer Research,
19, 75–79.
Gueguen, N., & Delfosse, C. (2012). She wore something in her hair: e eﬀect of ornamentation on
tipping, Journal of Hospitality Marketing and Management, 12, 414–420.
Gueguen, N., Martin, A., & Meineri, S. (2011). Similarity and social interaction: When similarity fosters
implicit behavior toward a stranger. Journal of Social Psychology, 15, 671–673.
Gueguen, N., Martin, A., & Meineri, S. (2011). Mimicry and helping behavior: An evaluation of
mimicry on explicit helping request. Journal of Social Psychology, 15, 1–4.
Gueguen, N., & Morineau, T. (2010). What is in a name? An eﬀect of similarity in computer-mediated
communication. Journal of Applied Psychology, 6, 1–4.
Gunnery, S. D., & Hall, J. A. (2014). e Duchenne smile and persuasion. Journal of Nonverbal
Behavior, 38, 181–194.
Guo, S., Ahang, G., & Ahai, R. (2010). A potential way of enquiry into human curiosity. British Journal
of Educational Technology, 41, 48–52.
Hall, E. T. (1966). e hidden dimension. Garden City, NY:  Doubleday.
Hancock, J., & Toma, C. (2009). Putting your best face forward: e accuracy of online dating
photographs. Journal of Communication 59, 367–386.
Harnish, R. J., Bridges, K. R., & Rottschaefer, K. M. (2014). Development and psychometric evaluation
of the sexual intent scale. Journal of Sex Research, 5, 667–680.
Hazan, C. D., & Diamond, L. M. (2000). e place of attachment in human mating. Review of General
Psychology, 4, 186–204.
Hill, C., Memon, A., & McGeorge, P. (2008). e role of conﬁrmation bias in suspect interviews: A
systematic evaluation. Legal and Criminological Psychology, 13, 357–371.
Hunt, G. L., & Price, J. B. (2002). Building rapport with the client. Internal Auditor, 59, 20–21.
Kaitz, M., Bar-Haim, Y., Lehrer, M., & Grossman, E. (2004). Adult attachment style and interpersonal
distance. Attachment and Human Development, 6, 285–304.
Kassin, S. M., Goldstein, C. C., & Savitsky, K. (2003). Behavior conﬁrmation in the interrogation room:
On the dangers of presuming guilt. Law and Human Behavior, 27, 187–203.
Kleinke, C. L. (1986). Gaze and eye contact: A research review. Psychological Review, 100, 78–100.
Kleinke, C. L., & Kahn, M. L. (1980). Perceptions of self-disclosures: Eﬀects of sex and physical
attractiveness. Journal of Personality, 48, 190–205.
Kellerman, J., Lewis, J., & Laird, J. D. (1989). Looking and loving: e eﬀects of mutual gaze on feelings
of romantic love. Journal of Research in Personality, 23, 145–161.
Kenrick, D. T., & Cialdini, R. B. (1977). Romantic attraction: Misattribution versus reinforcement
explanations. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 35, 381–391.
Knapp, M. L., & Hall, J. A. (1997). Nonverbal communication in human interaction (4th ed.). New York:
Harcourt Brace College.
Krumhuber, E., & Manstead, A. S. R. (2009). Are you joking? e moderating role of smiles in
perception of verbal statements. Cognition and Emotion, 23, 1504–1515.
Lee, L., Loewenstein, G., Ariely, D., Hong, J., & Young, J. (2008). If I’m not hot, are you hot or not?
Psychological Science, 10, 669–677.
Lewis, D. (1995). e secret language of success: Using body language to get what you want. New York:
Galahad Books.
Lynn, M., & McCall, M. (2000). Gratitude and gratuity: A meta-analysis of research on the service-
tipping relationship. Journal of Socio-Economics, 29, 203–214.
Macrea, C. N., Hood, B. M., Milne, A. B., Rowe, A. C., & Mason, M. F. (2002). Are you looking at me?
Eye gaze and person perception. Psychological Science, 13, 460–464.
Mai, X., Ge, Y., Toa, L., Tang, H., Liu, C., & Lou, Y. J. (2011). Eyes are windows to the Chinese soul:
From the detection of real and fake smiles. PLoS ONE, 5, 1–6.
Mantovani, F. (2001). Networked seduction: A test-bed for the study of strategic communication on the
Internet. Cyberpsychology and Behavior, 4, 147–154.
Martin, A., & Gueguen, N. (2013). e inﬂuence of incidental similarity on self- revelation in response
to an intimate survey. Social Behavior and Personality, 41, 353–356.
Mehu, M., & Dunbar, R. I. M. (2008). Naturalistic observations of smiling and laughter in human
group interactions. Behavior, 145, 1747–1780.
Mittone, L., & Savadori, L. (2009). e scarcity bias. Applied Psychology, 58, 453–468.
Moore, M. (2010). Human nonverbal courtship behavior: A brief historical review. Journal of Sex
Research, 47, 171–180.
Nadler, J. (2004). Rapport in negotiations and conﬂict resolution. Marquette Law Review, 5, 885–882.
Nahari, G., & Ben-Shakhar, G. (2013). Primacy eﬀect in credibility judgments: e vulnerability of
verbal cues to biased interpretations. Applied Cognitive Psychology, 27, 247–255.
Navarro, J., & Karlins, M. (2007). What every body is saying: An FBI special agent’s guide to speed-reading
people. New York: HarperCollins.
Nelson, H., & Geher, G. (2007). Mutual grooming in human dyadic relationships: An ethological
perspective. Current Psychology, 26, 121–140.
Nelson, S. (2014). Woman checks [boyfriend’s] phone, ﬁnds footage of him having sex with her
Staﬀordshire bull terrier dog. Huﬃngton Post UK, February 14.
Olﬀ, M. (2012). Bonding after trauma: On the role of support and the oxytocin system on traumatic
stress. European Journal of Psychotraumatology, 3, 1–11.
Opt, S. K., & Loﬀredo, D. A. (2003). Communicator image and Myers-Briggs type indicator
extroversion-introversion. Journal of Psychology, 137, 560–568.
Patterson, C. H. (1985). Empathic understanding: e therapeutic relationship. Monterey, CA:
Brooks/Cole.
Patterson, J., Gardner, B. C., Burr, B. K., Hubler, D. S., & Roberts, K. M. (2012). Nonverbal indicators
of negative aﬀect in couple interaction. Contemporary Family erapy, 34, 11–28.
Pease, A. (1984). Signals: How to use body language for power, success, and love. New York: Bantam Books.
Radford, M. (1998). Approach or avoidance? e role of nonverbal communication in the academic
library user. Library Trends, 46, 1–12.
Rogers, C. R. (1961). On becoming a person. Boston: Houghton Miﬄin.
Smeaton, G., Byrne, D. M., Murnen, S. K. (1989). e repulsion hypothesis revisited: Similarity
irrelevance or dissimilarity bias. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 56, 54–59.
Stefan, J., & Gueguen, N. (2014). Eﬀect of hair ornamentation on helping. Psychological Reports:
Relationships and Communication, 114, 491–495.
Stewart, J, E. (1980). Defendant’s attractiveness as a factor in the outcome of criminal trials: An
observational study. Journal of Applied Social Psychology, 10, 348–361.
Swann, M. (2013). e professor, the bikini model and the suitcase full of trouble. New York Times,
March 8.
Toma, C. L., Hancock, J. T., & Ellison, N. B. (2008). Separating fact from ﬁction: An examination of
deceptive self-presentation in online dating proﬁles. Personality & Social Psychology Bulletin, 34, 1023–
36. e conference paper was later published as a journal article.
Vanderhallen, M., Vervaeke, G., & Holmberg, U. (2011). Witness and suspect perceptions of working
alliance and interviewing style. Journal of Investigative Psychology and Oﬀender Proﬁling, 8, 110–130.
Videbeck, S. (2005). e economics and etiquette of tipping. Policy, 20, 38–41.
Vonk, R. (2002). Self-serving interpretations of ﬂattery: Why ingratiation works. Journal of Personality
and Social Psychology, 82, 515–526.
Wang, C. C., & Chang, Y. T. (2010). Cyber relationship motives: Scale development and validation.
Social Behavior and Personality, 38, 289–300.
Wainwright, G. R. (1993). Body language. Teach Yourself Books. London: Hodder & Stoughton.
Whitty, M. T., & Buchanan, T. (2012). e online romance scam: A serious cybercrime. Cyberpsychology,
Behavior, and Social Networking, 15, 181–183.
Zunin, L., & Zunin, N. (1972). Contact: e ﬁrst four minutes. New York: Ballantine Books.
INDEX
A note about the index: e pages referenced in this index refer to the page numbers in the print
edition. Clicking on a page number will take you to the ebook location that corresponds to the beginning
of that page in the print edition. For a comprehensive list of locations of any word or phrase, use your
reading system’s search function.
Page numbers in italics refer to photographs.
Active listening, 126, 190–93
Advice, asking for, 123–24, 144–45
Afghan people, winning over, 89–90
Aftab, Parry, 226
Aggressive stance, 54
Airline adventures
digital detectives, 222–23
unruly passenger, 145–46
upgrades, 91–95
Alternate response questions, 147
Angelou, Maya, 1
Anger management, 199–209
empathic statements in, 201, 202–4, 205, 207, 208, 209
guidelines for, 199–202
in online interactions, 220–21
presumptive statements in, 201–2, 205–6, 207, 208
reentering the anger cycle, 208–9
venting in, 200, 201, 202, 205, 207
Aristotle, 98
Arm crossing, 128–29, 175, 175–76
Arms akimbo, 54, 55
Arrogance, 65, 112
Association, 111
Attachments, email, 221–22
Attack signals, 54–55, 55
Attention, focused, 46
Attractiveness, 47–48, 108–9, 236
Backward leaning, 42, 43, 128, 175
Behavioral Analysis Program (BAP), ix, 3, 166
Ben Franklin eﬀect, 88
Big three anger management approach, 201–2. See also Empathic statements; Presumptive statements;
Venting
Big three friend signals, 25. See also Eyebrow ﬂash; Head tilt; Smiling
Bitch ﬂip, 169, 170
Blinking, 177
Botox paradox, 37–39
Brain
empathic statements interpreted by, 80
friend and foe signals interpreted by, 24
human baseline and, 19
isopraxism interpreted by, 41
online interactions and, 233, 234
smiles interpreted by, 25, 34
Bread crumb approach to self-disclosure, 107–8
Bridge-backs, conversational, 66
Brown, Marc, 24
CARE acronym, 188, 198. See also Active listening; Compassion/concern; Empathic statements;
Reinforcement
Caring, 187–88
Carlzon, Jan, 74–75
Carnegie, Dale, 66, 74
Cart, Ally, 242
Catphishing, 224–26, 233–41
cognitive dissonance and, 239
competing hypotheses and, 235–36, 240
emotional investment and, 238, 240
exposing, 239–41
primacy eﬀect and, 235
rapport building and, 236–37
truth bias and, 234–35, 240
Cell phone etiquette, 46, 218–20
Centerpiece positioning, 175
Charles (FBI agent), 2–6, 61, 250–53
Children. See Parent-child interactions
Chinese spy recruitment, 9–11
Chin jut, 3, 26
Clinton, Bill, 228
Closed posture, 173
Closeness, building. See Rapport
Clothing and accessories, 56–59, 98
Cognitive dissonance, 97, 122–23, 124, 239
Combining techniques, 89–91
Common ground. See Similarity (common ground)
Compassion/concern, 188–90
Competing hypotheses, 235–36, 240
Compliments, 80–84
eﬀective use of, 119
ﬂattery distinguished from, 80–81
pitfalls of using, 81
self-, 10, 81–82, 158
third-party, 82–84
Conﬁdence, 65
Consistency principle, 135, 137
Contemporaneous experiences, 99–100
Contrast, attractiveness and, 236
Control, illusion of, 145–47, 209
Conversation
avoiding pitfalls in, 159–60
empathic statements in, 80
starting, 62–66
turn-yielding cues in, 141
Conversational bridge-backs, 66
Cross matching, 40
Cultural diﬀerences, 56, 60, 131–32
Cup positioning, 37, 177–79, 178
Curiosity, 61, 90, 95
applying in everyday life, 12
eﬀective use of, 104–5
Graves’ use of, 251
Seagull and, 5–6
Vladimir and, 13
Dating. See also Catphishing; Romantic relationships
head tilts and, 30
initiating contact, xi–xii, 25
introvert-extrovert, 117
misattribution and, 103–4
online, 213–14, 216, 231–34
scarcity principle and, 114
Dickens, Charles, 217
Divorce (break glass technique), 212
Dogs, territoriality of, 61
Duration, 4, 90
applying in everyday life, 12
Chinese spy recruitment and, 11
deﬁned, 5
frequency relationship with, 7
Graves’ use of, 251
in relationship evaluation, 8
Ego, keeping in check, 123–24
Elevator eyes, 50–51
Elicitation, 149–57
characteristics of, 149–50
empathic, 152–54
Graves’ use of, 252
through presumptive statements, 150–51
Ellison, N., 231
Email etiquette, 220–22
Emoticons, 133
Emotional intelligence, 20
Emotional investment, 238, 240
Empathic conditional, 152, 153–54
Empathic elicitation, 152–54
Empathic presumptive, 152–53
Empathic statements, 66, 77–80, 136, 137, 138, 140, 172
to airline employees, 91, 93, 94
anger management and, 201, 202–4, 205, 207, 208, 209
basic formula for constructing, 77–78
conversation encouraged by, 80
example of use, 78–80
guidelines for using, 157–59
listening signaled by, 77, 127, 190
in long-term relationships, 198
similarity (common ground) explored via, 99–100
in witness interviews, 176, 190
word mines deactivated with, 132
Endorphin release, 31, 102, 103, 110, 253
Etiquette, online, 218–22
Exercise, 102, 103
Expressive gestures, 44–45, 71
Extroverts, 116–19, 125, 126–27, 142
Eye-blink rate, 177
Eyebrow ﬂash, 2–3, 25, 26–28, 27, 29, 37, 65, 71
Eyebrow furrowing, 54, 54
Eye closure, prolonged, 177
Eye contact/gaze, 2, 34–36, 71, 126
elevator eyes, 50–51
elongated (staring), 28, 35, 50, 61
during hair ﬂip, 169
observing and using, 34–35
optimal length of, 35
prolonged, 28, 35–36
rapport building with, 35–36, 163
undercover police identiﬁed by, 51–52
Eye rolls, 43, 52, 53
Eye squinting, 53
Face masks, 58–59
Face-to-face interactions, 20–22, 21
Facial tension, 54
Familiarity, 110
Favors, requesting, 88
FBI agent espionage case, 166
Festinger, Leon, 110
Fight/ﬂight response, 5, 55, 200, 201, 204, 233
Finkelstein, Scott, 128
Fireﬂy metaphor, 23–25, 49
Flattery, 10, 80–81. See also Compliments
Focused attention, 46
Foe signals, 15–16, 19–20, 24, 25, 90, 135, 182
absence of isopraxism as, 41
clothing and accessories as, 56–57
common types of, 53–56
conversation discouraged by, 64–65
eyebrow ﬂash as, 28
eye contact/gaze as, 35, 50
inadvertent, 16–18, 49–50
lack of rapport signiﬁed by, 181
personal space and, 59
when to send, 18
Food forking, 44, 71
Foot behavior, 62–64, 63, 64, 66, 173
Ford, Henry, 198
Franklin, Ben, 88
Frequency, 4, 90
applying in everyday life, 12
Chinese spy recruitment and, 11
deﬁned, 5
duration relationship with, 7
Graves’ use of, 251
in relationship evaluation, 8
Friend-foe continuum, 14–16, 19, 25, 161–62
Friendship continuum, 162
Friendship Formula, 1–22. See also Duration; Frequency; Intensity; Proximity
applying in everyday life, 12–13
combined with other techniques, 89–90
elements of, 4–6
Graves’ use of, 242–53
relationship self-evaluation and, 8–9
Vladimir inﬂuenced by, 13–14
Friend signals, 15–16, 19–20, 24, 90, 182, 183, 185, 233
applying in everyday life, 12
big three, 25 (see also Eyebrow ﬂash; Head tilt; Smiling)
Botox paradox and, 37–39
clothing and accessories as, 56–57
conversation encouraged by, 64–65
learning to use, 68, 69
negative response to, 14
personal space and, 59, 60
rapport building signiﬁed by, 181
with Seagull, 3
in suspect interviews, 36–37
Furrowed eyebrows, 54, 54
Geher, Glen, 166
Gestures
expressive, 44–45, 71
insulting, 56
Glory enchilada, sharing, 124
Golden Rule of Friendship, 45, 75–76, 101, 110, 119, 120, 155, 158. See also Compliments; Empathic
statements; Favors, requesting; Primacy eﬀect
airline upgrades and, 91–95
in conversation, 141
explained, 75, 124, 144
Graves’ use of, 253
listening and, 127
servers’ tips increased by, 49
Goodier, Steve, 119
“Go to the balcony” technique, 200
Graﬃti case, 148–49
Graves, A. K., 242–53
Grooming behaviors. See Preening (“grooming”) behaviors
Hair ﬂip, 169, 170, 171, 251–52
Hair ornamentation, 47–48
Hancock, J., 231–32
Hand holding, 40, 71
Hand touch, 40
Hansel and Gretel approach to self-disclosure, 107–8
Head nodding, 45, 65
Head tilt, 3, 25, 28–30, 30, 31, 37, 43, 65, 71
Hightower, Cullen, 19
Hogan, Kevin, 161
Hot-button issues, 191–93
Human baseline, 19–20, 41, 91, 204
Humor, 109–10
“I” language, 122, 123
Increased restraint = increased drive principle, 13–14, 114–15
Insulting gestures, 56
Intensity, 4, 5–6, 7, 90
applying in everyday life, 12
Chinese spy recruitment and, 11
deﬁned, 5
Graves’ use of, 251
in relationship evaluation, 8
Internal/external foci technique, 155–57
Internet. See Online interactions
Interviews. See Suspect interviews; Witness interviews
Intonation, 141
Introverts, 116–19, 142, 214–15
Inward leaning, 42, 42–43, 71, 128, 172
Iraq interrogators, training of, 172
Isopraxism (mirroring), 40–41, 41, 71, 168, 168–69
Kaczynski, Ted, 60
Kidnapping victim, author’s meeting with, 189–90
Klaric, Sana and Adnan, 224–25
“Land of Is” technique, 228–29
Laws of Attraction, 96–119, 236. See also Association; Attractiveness; Compliments; Curiosity;
Familiarity; Humor; Misattribution; Personality types and characteristics; Reciprocity; Rocky road
principle; Scarcity principle; Self-disclosure; Self-esteem; Similarity (common ground)
“Lead and follow” approach, 168–69
Leaning. See Backward leaning; Inward leaning
Lies/deception, 102, 119
in online interactions, 226–36 (see also Catphishing)
spotlight eﬀect and, 68
Lip bite, 137, 137–38
Lip compression, 128, 138, 138
Lip purse, 134–37, 135
Lip touching, 139, 139–40
Listening, 125–28
active, 126, 190–93
basics of, 126–27
empathic statements and, 77, 127, 190
in long-term relationships, 190–93
metronome experiment, 125–26
trust-building and, 128
Long-term relationships, 187–212
active listening in, 190–93
anger management in (see Anger management)
compassion/concern in, 188–90
dealing with problems in, 210–12
empathy in, 198
reinforcement in, 193–98
LOVE acronym, 126. See also Empathic statements; Listening; Observation; Vocalization
Marriage, 8. See also Romantic relationships
Mattis, James (“Mad Dog”), 89
Men
eye contact/gaze and, 36
head tilts and, 30
touch and, 164
Mentor-mentee relationships, 7, 124
Metronome experiment, 125–26
Mirroring behavior. See Isopraxism
Misattribution, 102–4, 253
Mistakes, beneﬁts of, 70
Moment of truth, 74–75
Music, discussing, 65, 100
Names
introducing oneself by, 48
using in conversation, 48–49, 65–66, 88
Negativistic partner, 193–94
Nelson, Holly 166
Neutral signals, 24, 25
Nonverbal footrace, 68–69
Nonverbal signals, 23–73, 120. See also Foe signals; Friend signals
clothing and accessories as, 56–59
ﬁreﬂy metaphor, 23–25, 49
free-fall phase of using, 69–70
monitoring, 43–44
observing and learning about, 70–73
North Korean (foreign national), 105
Nose scrunching. See Scrunched nose
Nostril ﬂare, 55
Observation, 128–40
basics of, 128–29
learning from, 70–73
obvious cues in, 134–40
word mines averted via, 129–34
Online interactions, 213–41
advantages of, 215–17
catphishing (see Catphishing)
etiquette for, 218–22
face-to-face interactions compared with, 20–22
face-to-face meeting arrangements, 240–41
“immortality” of information on, 217–18, 221
misunderstandings in, 133
self-disclosure in, 108, 237–38
testing for veracity and deception in, 226–36
Open posture, 172–73
Panhandlers, discouraging, 18
Parallel language, 77, 132, 201
Paraphrasing, 127
Parent-child interactions, xiii, 7
control issue in, 147
empathic statements in, 158–59
internal/external foci technique and, 157
scarcity principle and, 114–15
tone of voice in, 141
Parking spaces, territoriality and, 60–61
Perfectionistic partner, 194
Personality types and characteristics, 116–19
Personal space invasion
dogs and, 61
eye contact/gaze as, 35, 50, 51, 52
factors inﬂuencing, 59–61
Postural positioning, 172–73
Praise, 196. See also Compliments
Preening (“grooming”) behaviors, 166–67, 167
Presumptive statements
anger management and, 201–2, 205–6, 207, 208
elicitation through, 150–51
empathic, 152–53
Primacy eﬀect, 84–87
applying in everyday life, 12
combined with other techniques, 89–90
explained, 84–85
in online interactions, 235
self-bias and, 87
in suspect interviews, 86
Prolonged eye closure, 177
Prolonged eye contact/gaze, 28, 35–36
Proximity, 4–5, 90
applying in everyday life, 12
Chinese spy recruitment and, 11
deﬁned, 4
familiarity increased by, 110
Graves’ use of, 250–51
key to eﬀective use of, 5
in relationship evaluation, 8
Vladimir and, 13–14
Pupil dilation, 36
Quid pro quo principle, 154–55
Racial issues, 131
Rapport, 161–86
barriers to, 174–79
behaviors encouraging, 163–73
behaviors indicating presence or absence of, 181
buildup of over time, 180
eye contact and, 35–36, 163
graﬃti problem solved via, 148–49
with introverts, 117–18
in online interactions, 236–38
similarity (common ground) and, 65
in suspect interviews, 36–37, 162–63
Reciprocity, 91, 105–6
quid pro quo principle in, 154–55
self-disclosure and, 107
servers’ tips increased by, 48
in suspect interviews, 37
Reinforcement, 193–98
Relationships. See also Long-term relationships; Romantic relationships
broken, 71
combining friendship tools in, 89–91
extricating oneself from, 9
increasing the longevity of, 107–8
observing, 70–73
quiet comfort in, 72–73
self-evaluation of, 8–9
split, 72
Right-wrong dichotomy, 122, 142–45
Rocky road principle, 115–16
Rogers, Will, 23
Romantic relationships, 7. See also Dating
eye contact/gaze in, 35
observing behaviors in, 71
rocky roads in, 115
self-esteem and, 112–13
touching in, 40
Sadistic partner, 195
Sales, xii
advice requests in, 145
alternate response questions in, 147
empathic elicitation in, 152–54
lip touching and, 139–40
personality type importance in, 118–19
vicarious experiences used in, 101
Santayana, George, 161
Sarcasm, 141
Scandinavian Airlines System (SAS), 74–75
Scarcity principle, 13–14, 113–15
Screen names, 220
Scrunched nose, 56, 57
Seagull (foreign diplomat), 1–6, 61, 250–53
Self-disclosure, 106–8, 112, 237–38
Self-esteem, 111–13
Self-ﬂattery/compliments, 10, 81–82, 158
Servers, 47–49, 158
Sexting, 219
“Shields up,” 2, 5, 14, 50, 89, 159, 233, 252
Similarity (common ground), 70, 91, 97–102, 155
assessing, 98–99
Chinese spy recruitment and, 10–11
contemporaneous experience as, 99–100
as a conversation opener, 65
eﬀectiveness of, 97
in online interactions, 215, 236
temporal experience as, 100
vicarious experience as, 101–2
Small of the back, touching, 164, 165, 166
Smiling, 25, 31–34, 32, 33, 37, 65
Social media, 108, 222. See also Online interactions
Speed of voice, 140–41
Spies, 237
Chinese recruitment of, 9–11
FBI agent, 166
Graves, 242–53
North Korean, 105
Seagull, 1–6, 61, 250–53
Vladimir, x–xi, 13–14, 61, 114
Spotlight eﬀect, 41, 67–68
Squinting of the eyes, 53
Staring, 28, 35, 50, 61
Status elevation technique, 147–49
Strangers, 14–15, 19, 25, 161–62, 163
Suspect interviews
friend signals in, 36–37
lip compression in, 138
lip touching in, 139
personality type importance in, 118
primacy eﬀect in, 86
quid pro quo principle in, 154–55
rapport building in, 36–37, 162–63
Swann, Maxine, 214
Tattoos, 98
Teach Yourself Body Language (Wainwright), 108
“Tells,” 51–52, 181
Temporal experiences, 100
Te’o, Manti, 239
Territoriality, 59–61. See also Personal space invasion
Territory scan, 15–16, 25, 64, 78, 84
Texting, 21, 46
ird-party approach. See Internal/external foci technique; Primacy eﬀect
ird-party compliments, 82–84
ird-party introductions, 89–90
reats
elevator eyes as, 50
foe signals as, 25
Graves’ neutralizing of, 252
human baseline for, 19
intensity and, 5–6
postural positioning and, 173
proximity and, 5, 13
Tips, increasing, 47–49
Tokii.com, 213
Toma, C., 231–32
Tone of voice, 140, 141
Torso repositioning, 42, 173, 174
Touch, 38, 39–40, 47, 163–64, 165
Trust, 108, 109, 128, 202
Truth bias, 234–35, 240
Turn-yielding cues, 141
Unabomber, 60
Undercover police work, 51–52
Urban scowl, 16–18, 17, 28, 49
Venting, 200, 201, 202, 205, 207
Verbal communication, 120–60
ego check in, 123–24
example of misuse, 121–23
LOVE acronym for (see LOVE acronym)
most important rule in, 120
sharing glory in, 124
Verbal nudges, 46, 172
Vicarious experiences, 101–2
Vladimir (spy), x–xi, 13–14, 61, 114
Vocalization, 140–57
content of, 142–45
manner of, 140–42
Voluntary compliance, obtaining, 208–9
Wainwright, Gordon, 108–9
“Well . . .” technique, 227–28
“What Do You See” quiz
answers, 255–57
photos, 181–86
Whispering, 44, 71
“Why should I believe you?” question, 230–31
Wilde, Oscar, 120
Witness interviews, 176–77, 189–90, 227
Women
head tilts and, 30
service tips for, 47–49
smiling and, 34
touch and, 164
Word mines, 129–34, 191–92
Work
lip purse display at, 136–37
personality type and, 119
rocky road principle at, 115–16
third-party compliments at, 83–84
verbal communication misuse at, 121–23
“You” language, 122
Ziglar, Zig, 96, 187
Touchstone
A Division of Simon & Schuster, Inc.
1230 Avenue of the Americas
New York, NY 10020
www.SimonandSchuster.com
Copyright © 2015 by John Schafer, Ph.D. and Marvin Karlins, Ph.D.
e opinions expressed in this book are those of the author and not those of the Federal Bureau of
Investigation (FBI).
All rights reserved, including the right to reproduce this book or portions thereof in any form whatsoever.
For information address Touchstone Subsidiary Rights Department, 1230 Avenue of the Americas, New
York, NY 10020.
First Touchstone trade paperback edition January 2015
TOUCHSTONE and colophon are registered trademarks of Simon & Schuster, Inc.
e Simon & Schuster Speakers Bureau can bring authors to your live event. For more information or to
book an event contact the Simon & Schuster Speakers Bureau at 1-866-248-3049 or visit our website at
www.simonspeakers.com.
Interior design by Ruth Lee-Mui
Cover design by David High
Cover art by ArtBitz/Shutterstock
Photographs by Dave and Lynda Mills of Dave Mills Photography, Lancaster, California
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Schafer, Jack.
 e like switch : an ex–FBI agent’s guide to inﬂuencing, attracting, and winning people over / Jack
Schafer, Marvin Karlins.
  pages cm.—(A Touchstone book)
1. Friendship. 2. Interpersonal attraction. 3. Inﬂuence (Psychology) 4. Interpersonal relations. 
I. Karlins, Marvin. II. Title.
 BF575.F66S33 2015
 158.2'5—dc23   2014009121
ISBN 978-1-4767-5448-2
ISBN 978-1-4767-5450-5 (ebook)
