Term: Friendship Formula
Definition: A mathematical representation of how friendship is developed over time. It is based on four key elements, namely Proximity, Frequency, Duration, and Intensity, which are all important in the formation of close relationships.

Term: Proximity
Definition: The distance between you and another individual and your exposure to that individual over time. It is an essential factor in developing personal relationships because just being in the same vicinity as your recruitment target predisposes them to like you and promotes mutual attraction. However, proximity has to take place in a non-threatening environment.

Term: Frequency
Definition: The number of contacts you have with another individual over time. The more frequently you are seen by the person, the more likely you are to form a relationship with them.

Term: Duration
Definition: The length of time you spend with another individual over time. This could involve extending the contact time between you and the individual in question, such as spending longer periods around them.

Term: Intensity 
Definition: How strongly you are able to satisfy another person’s psychological and/or physical needs through the use of verbal and nonverbal behaviors. This aspect of the formula deals with creating a strong impression in the other person's mind, which increases their interest in the individual.

Term: Nonverbal "friend" signals
Definition: These are nonverbal cues that an individual sends to convey friendly intentions and form close relationships with others. It can help the individual to become an object of curiosity instead of being perceived as a threat.

Term: rationalization strategies
Definition: These are strategies that potential defectors or spies develop over time to justify their action of switching allegiance. It involves a period of self-convincing where ideas of betrayal are allowed to germinate and bloom.

Term: Latency period
Definition: It is the period during which a potential defector or spy begins to contemplate the idea of switching allegiances in earnest. During this time, the idea matures, and the individual grows accustomed to the idea of changing their loyalty.