Term: Ornamentation on tipping
Definition: The study investigating the influence of the presence of an ornament in women's hair on the tipping behavior of customers. (Gueguen, N., & Delfosse, C., 2012)

Term: Similarity and social interaction
Definition: The study examining how similarity between individuals can foster implicit behavior towards a stranger. (Gueguen, N., Martin, A., & Meineri, S., 2011)

Term: Mimicry and helping behavior
Definition: An examination of the effect of mimicry on the willingness of individuals to respond to explicit helping requests. (Gueguen, N., Martin, A., & Meineri, S., 2011)

Term: Duchenne smile and persuasion
Definition: The research about the role of genuine, involuntary smiles (Duchenne smiles) in persuasion tactics. (Gunnery, S. D., & Hall, J. A., 2014)

Term: The place of attachment in human mating
Definition: The study exploring the role of emotional attachment in the selection and retention of mates. (Hazan, C. D., & Diamond, L. M., 2000)

Term: The role of confirmation bias in suspect interviews
Definition: A systematic investigation into the presence and effect of an existing bias towards confirmation in suspect interviews. (Hill, C., Memon, A., & McGeorge, P., 2008)

Term: Adult attachment style and interpersonal distance
Definition: The research investigating the relationship between an adult's attachment style and the interpersonal distance they tend to keep from others. (Kaitz, M., Bar-Haim, Y., Lehrer, M., & Grossman, E., 2004)

Term: The scarcity bias
Definition: A study focusing on the perceptual bias wherein objects or resources that are scarce are perceived as more valuable. (Mittone, L., & Savadori, L., 2009)

Term: Mutual grooming in human dyadic relationships
Definition: A research examining the phenomenon of mutual grooming (exchange of grooming behaviors) in human dyadic (pair) relationships from an ethological perspective. It proposes that mutual grooming serves a key social bonding function. (Nelson, H., & Geher, G., 2007)

Term: Communicator image and Myers-Briggs type indicator extroversion-introversion
Definition: A study examining the relationship between an individual's Myers-Briggs type indicator for extraversion-introversion and the image they project as a communicator. (Opt, S. K., & Loﬀredo, D. A., 2003)