The Coquette • 73
Early on in life, Andy Warhol was plagued by conflicting emotions: he des-
perately wanted fame, but he was naturally passive and shy "I've always had
a conflict," he later said, "because I'm shy and yet I like to take up a lot of
personal space. Mom always said, 'Don't be pushy, but let everyone know
you're around.' " At first Warhol tried to make himself more aggressive,
straining to please and court. It didn't work. After ten futile years he
stopped trying and gave in to his own passivity—only to discover the power
that withdrawal commands.
Warhol began this process in his artwork, which changed dramatically
in the early 1960s. His new paintings of soup cans, green stamps, and other
widely known images did not assault you with meaning; in fact their mean-
ing was totally elusive, which only heightened their fascination. They drew
you in by their immediacy, their visual power, their coldness. Having trans-
formed his art, Warhol also transformed himself: like his paintings, he be-
came pure surface. He trained himself to hold himself back, to stop talking.
The world is full of people who try, people who impose themselves ag-
gressively. They may gain temporary victories, but the longer they are
around, the more people want to confound them. They leave no space
around themselves, and without space there can be no seduction. Cold Co-
quettes create space by remaining elusive and making others pursue them.
Their coolness suggests a comfortable confidence that is exciting to be
around, even though it may not actually exist; their silence makes you want
to talk. Their self-containment, their appearance of having no need for
other people, only makes us want to do things for them, hungry for the
slightest sign of recognition and favor. Cold Coquettes may be maddening
to deal with—never committing but never saying no, never allowing close-
ness—but more often than not we find ourselves coming back to them, ad-
dicted to the coldness they project. Remember: seduction is a process of
drawing people in, making them want to pursue and possess you. Seem dis-
tant and people will go mad to win your favor. Humans, like nature, hate a
vacuum, and emotional distance and silence make them strain to fill up the
empty space with words and heat of their own. Like Warhol, stand back
and let them fight over you.
[Narcissistic] women have the greatest fascination for
men. . . . The charm of a child lies to a great extent in his
narcissism, his self-sufficiency and inaccessibility, just as
does the charm of certain animals which seem not to con-
cern themselves about us, such as cats. . . . It is as if we
envied them their power of retaining a blissful state of
mind—an unassailable libido-position which we ourselves
have since abandoned.
—SIGMUND FREUDin him, and as he drank,
he was enchanted by the
beautiful reflection that he
saw. He fell in love with
an insubstantial hope,
mistaking a mere shadow
for a real body. Spellbound
by his own self, he
remained there motionless,
with fixed gaze, like a
statue carved from Parian
marble. . . . Unwittingly,
he desired himself, and was
himself the object of his
own approval, at once
seeking and sought, himself
kindling the flame with
which he burned. How
often did he vainly kiss the
treacherous pool, how often
plunge his arms deep in the
waters, as he tried to clasp
the neck he saw! But he
could not lay hold upon
himself. He did not know
what he was looking at,
but was fired by the sight,
and excited by the very
illusion that deceived his
eyes. Poor foolish boy, why
vainly grasp at the fleeting
image that eludes you?
The thing you are seeking
does not exist: only turn
aside and you will lose
what you love. What you
see is but the shadow cast
by your reflection; in itself
it is nothing. It comes with
you, and lasts while you
are there; it will go when
you go, if go you can. . . .
• He laid down his weary
head on the green grass,
and death closed the eyes
which so admired their
owner's beauty. Even then,
when he was received into
the abode of the dead, he
kept looking at himself in
the waters of the Styx. His
sisters, the nymphs of the
spring, mourned for him,
and cut off their hair in
tribute to their brother. The
wood nymphs mourned
him too, and Echo sang her
refrain to their lament. •
The pyre, the tossing
74 • The Art of Seduction
Keys to the Character
According to the popular concept, Coquettes are consummate teases,
experts at arousing desire through a provocative appearance or an al-
luring attitude. But the real essence of Coquettes is in fact their ability to
trap people emotionally, and to keep their victims in their clutches long af-
ter that first titillation of desire. This is the skill that puts them in the ranks
of the most effective seducers. Their success may seem somewhat odd,
since they are essentially cold and distant creatures; should you ever get to
know one well, you will sense his or her inner core of detachment and self-
love. It may seem logical that once you become aware of this quality you
will see through the Coquette's manipulations and lose interest, but more
often we see the opposite. After years of Josephine's coquettish games,
Napoleon was well aware of how manipulative she was. Yet this conqueror
of kingdoms, this skeptic and cynic, could not leave her.
To understand the peculiar power of the Coquette, you must first
understand a critical property of love and desire: the more obviously you
pursue a person, the more likely you are to chase them away. Too much at-
tention can be interesting for a while, but it soon grows cloying and finally
becomes claustrophobic and frightening. It signals weakness and neediness,
an unseductive combination. How often we make this mistake, thinking
our persistent presence will reassure. But Coquettes have an inherent un-
derstanding of this particular dynamic. Masters of selective withdrawal,
they hint at coldness, absenting themselves at times to keep their victim off
balance, surprised, intrigued. Their withdrawals make them mysterious,
and we build them up in our imaginations. (Familiarity, on the other hand,
undermines what we have built.) A bout of distance engages the emotions
further; instead of making us angry, it makes us insecure. Perhaps they
don't really like us, perhaps we have lost their interest. Once our vanity is at
stake, we succumb to the Coquette just to prove we are still desirable. Re-
member: the essence of the Coquette lies not in the tease and temptation
but in the subsequent step back, the emotional withdrawal. That is the key
to enslaving desire.
To adopt the power of the Coquette, you must understand one other
quality: narcissism. Sigmund Freud characterized the "narcissistic woman"
(most often obsessed with her appearance) as the type with the greatest ef-
fect on men. As children, he explains, we pass through a narcissistic phase
that is immensely pleasurable. Happily self-contained and self-involved, we
have little psychic need of other people. Then, slowly, we are socialized and
taught to pay attention to others—but we secretly yearn for those blissful
early days. The narcissistic woman reminds a man of that period, and makes
him envious. Perhaps contact with her will restore that feeling of self-
involvement.
A man is also challenged by the female Coquette's independence—he
wants to be the one to make her dependent, to burst her bubble. It is far
more likely, though, that he will end up becoming her slave, giving her in-torches, and the bier, were
now being prepared, but
his body was nowhere to be
found. Instead of his
corpse, they discovered a
flower with a circle of white
petals round a yellow
centre.
—OVID, METAMORPHOSES,
TRANSLATED BY
MARY M. INNES
Selfishness is one of the
qualities apt to inspire love.
—NATHANIEL HAWTHORNE
The Socrates whom you
see has a tendency to fall in
love with good-looking
young men, and is always
in their society and in an
ecstasy about them...but
once you see beneath the
surface you will discover a
degree of self-control of
which you can hardly form
a notion, gentlemen. . . .
He spends his whole life
pretending and playing
with people, and I doubt
whether anyone has ever
seen the treasures which are
revealed when he grows
serious and exposes what
he keeps inside. •
. . . Believing that he was
serious in his admiration of
my charms, I supposed that
a wonderful piece of good
luck had befallen me; I
should now be able, in
return for my favours, to
find out all that Socrates
knew; for you must know
that there was no limit to
the pride that I felt in my
good looks. With this end
in view I sent away my
attendant, whom hitherto I
had always kept with me
in my encounters with
Socrates, and left myself
alone with him. I must tell
you the whole truth; attend
carefully, and do you,
