428 • The Art of Seduction
and revived an old love. Once you have seduced a person (or a nation)
there is almost always a lull, a slight letdown, which sometimes leads to a
separation; it is surprisingly easy, though, to re-seduce the same target. The
old feelings never go away, they lie dormant, and in a flash you can take
your target by surprise.
It is a rare pleasure to be able to relive the past, and one's youth—to feel
the old emotions. Like Napoleon, add a dramatic flair to your re-seduction:
revive the old images, the symbols, the expressions that will stir memory.
Like the French, your targets will tend to forget the ugliness of the separa-
tion and will remember only the good things. You should make this second
seduction bold and quick, giving your targets no time to reflect or wonder.
Like Napoleon, play on the contrast to their current lover, making his or
her behavior seem timid and stodgy by comparison.
Not everyone will be receptive to a re-seduction, and some moments
will be inappropriate. When Napoleon came back from Elba, the Parisians
were too sophisticated for him, and could see right through him. Unlike
the peasants of the South, they already knew him well; and his reentry
came too soon, they were too worn out by him. If you want to re-seduce
someone, choose one who does not know you so well, whose memories of
you are cleaner, who is less suspicious by nature, and who is dissatisfied
with present circumstances. Also, you might want to let some time pass.
Time will restore your luster and make your faults fade away. Never see a
separation or sacrifice as final. With a little drama and planning, a victim
can be retaken in no time.
Symbol: Em-
bers, the remains of the fire on the
morning after. Left to themselves, the embers will
slowly die out. Do not leave the fire to chance and to the
elements. To put it out, douse it, suffocate it, give it nothing to
feed on. To bring it back to life, fan it, stoke it, until it blazes
anew. Only your constant attention and vigilance will keep it burning.
Beware the Aftereffects • 429
Reversal
To keep a person enchanted, you will have to re-seduce them con-
stantly. But you can allow a little familiarity to creep in. The target
wants to feel that he or she is getting to know you. Too much mystery will
create doubt. It will also be tiring for you, who will have to sustain it. The
point is not to remain completely unfamiliar but rather, on occasion, to jolt
victims out of their complacency, surprising them as you surprised them in
the past. Do this right and they will have the delightful feeling that they are
constantly getting to know more about you—but never too much.
