The Art of Charm
Sexuality is extremely disruptive. The insecurities and emotions it stirs
up can often cut short a relationship that would otherwise be deeper
and longer lasting. The Charmer's solution is to fulfill the aspects of
sexuality that are so alluring and addictive—the focused attention, the
boosted self-esteem, the pleasurable wooing, the understanding (real or
illusory)—but subtract the sex itself. It's not that the Charmer represses
or discourages sexuality; lurking beneath the surface of any attempt at
charm is a sexual tease, a possibility. Charm cannot exist without a hint of
sexual tension. It cannot be maintained, however, unless sex is kept at bay
or in the background.
The word "charm" comes from the Latin carmen, a song, but also an in-
cantation tied to the casting of a magical spell. The Charmer implicitly
grasps this history, casting a spell by giving people something that holds
their attention, that fascinates them. And the secret to capturing people's
attention, while lowering their powers of reason, is to strike at the things
they have the least control over: their ego, their vanity, and their self-
esteem. As Benjamin Disraeli said, "Talk to a man about himself and
he will listen for hours." The strategy can never be obvious; subtlety is the
Charmer's great skill. If the target is to be kept from seeing through
the Charmer's efforts, and from growing suspicious, maybe even tiring of the
attention, a light touch is essential. The Charmer is like a beam of light that
doesn't play directly on a target but throws a pleasantly diffused glow over it.
Charm can be applied to a group as well as to an individual: a leader
can charm the public. The dynamic is similar. The following are the laws of
charm, culled from the stories of the most successful charmers in history.
Make your target the center of attention. Charmers fade into the back-
ground; their targets become the subject of their interest. To be a Charmer
you have to learn to listen and observe. Let your targets talk, revealing
themselves in the process. As you find out more about them—their
strengths, and more important their weaknesses—you can individualize
your attention, appealing to their specific desires and needs, tailoring your
flatteries to their insecurities. By adapting to their spirit and empathizing
with their woes, you can make them feel bigger and better, validating their
sense of self-worth. Make them the star of the show and they will becomeBirds are taken with pipes
that imitate their own
voices, and men with those
sayings that are most
agreeable to their own
opinions.
—SAMUEL BUTLER
Go with the bough, you'll
bend it; \ Use brute force,
it'll snap. \ Go with the
current: that's how to swim
across rivers— \ Fighting
upstream's no good. \ Go
easy with lions or tigers if
you aim to tame them; \
The bull gets inured to the
plough by slow degrees. . . . \
So, yield if she shows
resistance: \ That way
you'll win in the end. fust
be sure to play \ The part
she allots you. Censure the
things she censures, \
Endorse her endorsements,
echo her every word, \ Pro
or con, and laugh whenever
she laughs; remember, \ If
she weeps, to weep too:
take your cue \ From her
every expression. Suppose
she's playing a board game,
\ Then throw the dice
carelessly, move \ Your
pieces all wrong. . . . \
Don't jib at a slavish task
like holding \ Her mirror:
81
82 • The Art of Seduction
addicted to you and grow dependent on you. On a mass level, make ges-
tures of self-sacrifice (no matter how fake) to show the public that you
share their pain and are working in their interest, self-interest being the
public form of egotism.
Be a source of pleasure. No one wants to hear about your problems and
troubles. Listen to your targets' complaints, but more important, distract
them from their problems by giving them pleasure. (Do this often enough
and they will fall under your spell.) Being lighthearted and fun is always
more charming than being serious and critical. An energetic presence is
likewise more charming than lethargy, which hints at boredom, an enor-
mous social taboo; and elegance and style will usually win out over vul-
garity, since most people like to associate themselves with whatever they
think elevated and cultured. In politics, provide illusion and myth rather
than reality. Instead of asking people to sacrifice for the greater good, talk
of grand moral issues. An appeal that makes people feel good will translate
into votes and power.
Bring antagonism into harmony. The court is a cauldron of resentment
and envy, where the sourness of a single brooding Cassius can quickly turn
into a conspiracy. The Charmer knows how to smooth out conflict. Never
stir up antagonisms that will prove immune to your charm; in the face of
those who are aggressive, retreat, let them have their little victories. Yield-
ing and indulgence will charm the fight out of any potential enemies.
Never criticize people overtly—that will make them insecure, and resistant
to change. Plant ideas, insinuate suggestions. Charmed by your diplomatic
skills, people will not notice your growing power.
Lull your victims into ease and comfort. Charm is like the hypnotist's
trick with the swinging watch: the more relaxed the target, the easier it is
to bend him or her to your will. The key to making your victims feel com-
fortable is to mirror them, adapt to their moods. People are narcissists—
they are drawn to those most similar to themselves. Seem to share their
values and tastes, to understand their spirit, and they will fall under your
spell. This works particularly well if you are an outsider: showing that you
share the values of your adopted group or country (you have learned their
language, you prefer their customs, etc.) is immensely charming, since for
you this preference is a choice, not a question of birth. Never pester or be
overly persistent—these uncharming qualities will disrupt the relaxation
you need to cast your spell.slavish or not, such
attentions please. . . .
—OVID, THE ART OF LOVE,
TRANSLATED BY PETER GREEN
Disraeli was asked to
dinner, and came in green
velvet trousers, with a
canary waistcoat, buckle
shoes, and lace cuffs. His
appearance at first proved
disquieting, but on leaving
the table the guests
remarked to each other that
the wittiest talker at the
luncheon-party was the
man in the yellow
waistcoat. Benjamin had
made great advances in
social conversation since the
days of Murray's dinners.
Faithful to his method, he
noted the stages: "Do not
talk too much at present;
do not try to talk. But
whenever you speak, speak
with self-possession. Speak
in a subdued tone, and
always look at the person
whom you are addressing.
Before one can engage in
general conversation with
any effect, there is a certain
acquaintance with trifling
but amusing subjects which
must be first attained. You
will soon pick up sufficient
by listening and observing.
Never argue. In society
nothing must be discussed;
give only results. If any
person differ from you, bow
and turn the conversation.
In society never think;
always be on the watch, or
you will miss many
opportunities and say
many disagreeable things.
Talk to women, talk to
women as much as you
can. This is the best
school. This is the way to
gain fluency, because you
need not care what you say,
and had better not be
sensible. They, too, will
rally you on many points,
