
The Lost Self
In March of 1812, the twenty-four-year-old George Gordon Byron pub-
lished the first cantos of his poem Childe Harold. The poem was filled
with familiar gothic imagery—a dilapidated abbey, debauchery, travels to
the mysterious East—but what made it different was that the hero of the
poem was also its villain: Harold was a man who led a life of vice, disdain-
ing society's conventions yet somehow going unpunished. Also, the poem
was not set in some faraway land but in present-day England. Childe Harold
created an instant stir, becoming the talk of London. The first printing
quickly sold out. Within days a rumor made the rounds: the poem, about a
debauched young nobleman, was in fact autobiographical.
Now the cream of society clamored to meet Lord Byron, and many of
them left their calling cards at his London residence. Soon he was showing
up at their homes. Strangely enough, he exceeded their expectations. He
was devilishly handsome, with curling hair and the face of an angel. His
black attire set off his pale complexion. He did not talk much, which made
an impression of itself, and when he did, his voice was low and hypnotic
and his tone a little disdainful. He had a limp (he was born with a clubfoot),
so when an orchestra struck up a waltz (the dance craze of 1812), he would
stand to the side, a faraway look in his eye. The ladies went wild over By-
ron. Upon meeting him, Lady Roseberry felt her heart beating so violently
(a mix of fear and excitement) that she had to walk away. Women fought to
be seated next to him, to win his attention, to be seduced by him. Was it
true that he was guilty of a secret sin, like the hero of his poem?
Lady Caroline Lamb—wife of William Lamb, son of Lord and Lady
Melbourne—was a glittering young woman on the social scene, but deep
inside she was unhappy. As a young girl she had dreamt of adventure, ro-
mance, travel. Now she was expected to play the role of the polite young
wife, and it did not suit her. Lady Caroline was one of the first to read
Childe Harold, and something more than its novelty stirred her. When she
saw Lord Byron at a dinner party, surrounded by women, she looked at his
face, then walked away; that night she wrote of him in her journal, "Mad,
bad, and dangerous to know." She added, "That beautiful pale face is my
fate."
The next day, to Lady Caroline's surprise, Lord Byron called on her.
Evidently he had seen her walking away from him, and her shyness had in-
trigued him—he disliked the aggressive women who were constantly at hisIt is a matter of a certain
hind of feeling: that of
being overwhelmed. There
are many who have a great
fear of bring overwhelmed
by someone; for example,
someone who makes them
laugh against their will, or
tickles them to death, or,
worse, tells them things
that they sense to be
accurate but which they do
not quite understand,
things that go beyond their
prejudices and received
wisdom, In other words,
they do not want to be
seduced, since seduction
means confronting people
with their limits, limits
that are supposed to be set
and stable but that the
seducer suddenly causes to
waver. Seduction is the
desire of being
overwhelmed, taken
beyond.
—DANIEL SIBONY,
L'AMOUR INCONSCIENT
Just lately I saw a tight-
reined stallion \ Get the bit
in his teeth and bolt \ Like
lightning—yet the minute
he felt the reins slacken, \
Drop loose on his flying
mane, \ He stopped dead.
351
