268 • The Art of Seduction
were escorted into the presence of the empress dowager. The sight took
their breath away. The empress was seated on the Dragon Throne, which
was studded with jewels. She wore heavily brocaded robes, a magnificent
headdress bearing diamonds, pearls, and jade, and an enormous necklace of
perfectly matched pearls. She was a tiny woman, but on the throne, in that
dress, she seemed a giant. She smiled at the ladies with much warmth and
sincerity. To their relief, seated below her on a smaller throne was her
nephew the emperor. He looked pale, but he greeted them enthusiastically
and seemed in good spirits. Maybe he was indeed simply ill.
The empress shook the hand of each of the women. As she did so, an
attendant eunuch handed her a large gold ring set with a large pearl, which
she slipped onto each woman's hand. After this introduction, the wives
were escorted into another room, where they again took tea, and then were
led into a banqueting hall, where the empress now sat on a chair of yellow
satin—yellow being the imperial color. She spoke to them for a while; she
had a beautiful voice. (It was said that her voice could literally charm birds
out of trees.) At the end of the conversation, she took the hand of each
woman again, and with much emotion, told them, "One family—all one
family." The women then saw a performance in the imperial theater. Fi-
nally the empress received them one last time. She apologized for the per-
formance they had just seen, which was certainly inferior to what they
were used to in the West. There was one more round of tea, and this time,
as the wife of the American ambassador reported it, the empress "stepped
forward and tipped each cup of tea to her own lips and took a sip, then
lifted the cup on the other side, to our lips, and said again, 'One family—all
one family' " The women were given more gifts, then were escorted back
to their sedan chairs and borne out of the Forbidden City.
The women relayed to their husbands their earnest belief that they had
all been wrong about the empress. The American ambassador's wife re-
ported, "She was bright and happy and her face glowed with good will.
There was no trace of cruelty to be seen. . . . Her actions were full of free-
dom and warmth. . . . [We left] full of admiration for her majesty and
hopes for China." The husbands reported back to their governments: the
emperor was fine, and the empress could be trusted.
Interpretation. The foreign contingent in China had no idea what was
really happening in the Forbidden City. In truth, the emperor had con-
spired to arrest and possibly murder his aunt. Discovering the plot, a terri-
ble crime in Confucian terms, she forced him to sign his own abdication,
had him confined, and told the outside world that he was ill. As part of his
punishment, he was to appear at state functions and act as if nothing had
happened.
The empress dowager loathed Westerners, whom she considered bar-
barians. She disliked the ambassadors' wives, with their ugly fashions and
simpering ways. The banquet was a show, a seduction, to appease the West-adjacent wharfs. The city
cast \ Her people out upon
her; and Antony, \
Enthron'd i' the market-
place, did sit alone, \
Whistling to the air;
which, but for vacancy, \
Had gone to gaze on
Cleopatra too \ And made
a gap in nature.
—WILLIAM SHAKESPEARE,
ANTONY AND CLEOPATRA
In the palmy days of the
gay quarters at Edo there
was a connoisseur of
fashion named Sakakura
who grew intimate with the
great courtesan Chitose.
This woman was much
given to drinking sake; as
a side dish she relished the
so-called flower crabs, to be
found in the Mogami
River in the East, and
these she had pickled in
salt for her enjoyment.
Knowing this, Sakakura
commissioned a painter of
the Kano School to execute
her bamboo crest in
powdered gold on the tiny
shells of these crabs; he
fixed the price of each
painted shell at one
rectangular piece of gold,
and presented them to
Chitose throughout the
year, so that she never
lacked for them.
—IHARA SAIKAKU, THE LIFE OF
AN AMOROUS WOMAN, AND
OTHER WRITINGS, TRANSLATED
BY IVAN MORRIS
For such men as have
practised love, have ever
held this a sound maxim
that there is naught to be
compared with a woman in
her clothes. Again when
you reflect how a man doth
brave, rumple, squeeze and
make light of his lady's
finery, and how he doth
Pay Attention to Detail • 269
ern powers, which had been threatening invasion if the emperor had been
killed. The goal of the seduction was simple: dazzle the wives with color,
spectacle, theater. The empress applied all her expertise to the task, and she
was a genius for detail. She had designed the spectacles in a rising order—
the uniformed eunuchs first, then the Manchu ladies in their headdresses,
and finally the empress herself. It was pure theater, and it was overwhelm-
ing. Then the empress brought the spectacle down a notch, humanizing it
with gifts, warm greetings, the reassuring presence of the emperor, teas,
and entertainments, which were in no way inferior to anything in the West.
She ended the banquet on another high note—the little drama with the
sharing of the teacups, followed by even more magnificent gifts. The
women's heads were spinning when they left. In truth they had never seen
such exotic splendor—and they never understood how carefully its details
had been orchestrated by the empress. Charmed by the spectacle, they trans-
ferred their happy feelings to the empress and gave her their approval—all
that she required.
The key to distracting people (seduction is distraction) is to fill their
eyes and ears with details, little rituals, colorful objects. Detail is what
makes things seem real and substantial. A thoughtful gift won't seem to
have an ulterior motive. A ritual full of charming little actions is so enjoy-
able to watch. Jewelry, handsome furnishings, touches of color in clothing,
dazzle the eye. It is a childish weakness of ours: we prefer to focus on the
pleasant little details rather than on the larger picture. The more senses you
appeal to, the more mesmerizing the effect. The objects you use in your se-
duction (gifts, clothes, etc.) speak their own language, and it is a powerful
one. Never ignore a detail or leave one to chance. Orchestrate them into a
spectacle and no one will notice how manipulative you are being.
The Sensuous Effect
One day a messenger told Prince Genji—the aging but still consum-
mate seducer in the Heian court of late-tenth-century Japan—that
one of his youthful conquests had suddenly died, leaving behind an or-
phan, a young woman named Tamakazura. Genji was not Tamakazura s fa-
ther, but he decided to bring her to court and be her protector anyway.
Soon after her arrival, men of the highest rank began to woo her. Genji
had told everyone she was a lost daughter of his; as a result, they assumed
that she was beautiful, for Genji was the handsomest man in the court. (At
the time, men rarely saw a young girl's face before marriage; in theory, they
were allowed to talk to her only if she was on the other side of a screen.)
Genji showered her with attention, helping her sort through all the love
letters she was receiving and advising her on the right match.
As Tamakazura's protector, Genji was able to see her face, and she was
indeed beautiful. He fell in love with her. What a shame, he thought, to
give this lovely creature away to another man. One night, overwhelmed bywork ruin and loss to the
grand cloth of gold and web
of silver, to tinsel
and silken stuffs, pearls and
precious stones, 'tis plain
how his ardour and
satisfaction be increased
manifold—far more than
with some simple
shepherdess or other woman
of like quality, be she as
fair as she may. • And why
of yore was Venus found so
fair and so desirable, if not
that with all her beauty she
was always gracefully
attired likewise, and
generally scented, that she
did ever smell sweet an
hundred paces away? For it
hath ever been held of all
how that perfumes be a
great incitement to love. •
This is the reason why the
Empresses and great dames
of Rome did make much
usage of these perfumes, as
do likewise our great ladies
of France—and above all
those of Spain and Italy,
which from the oldest times
have been more curious and
more exquisite in luxury
than Frenchwomen, as well
in perfumes as in costumes
and magnificent attire,
whereof the fair ones of
France have since borrowed
the patterns and copied the
dainty workmanship.
Moreover the others, Italian
and Spanish, had learned
the same from old models
and ancient statues of
Roman ladies, the which
are to be seen among
sundry other antiquities yet
extant in Spain and Italy;
the which, if any man will
regard them carefully, will
be found very perfect in
mode of hair-dressing and
fashion of robes, and very
meet to incite love.
—SEIGNEUR DE BRANTÔME,
LIVES OF FAIR & GALLANT
LADIES, TRANSLATED BY A. R.
ALLINSON
