206 • The Art of Seduction
novel was about to be published), he needed to make more money. Caught
off guard by this sudden announcement, and overwhelmed with happiness,
Jessie agreed to everything, and they became lovers.
Soon, however, the familiar pattern repeated: criticisms, breakups, an-
nouncements that he was engaged to another girl. This only deepened his
hold on her. It was not until 1912 that she finally decided never to see him
again, disturbed by his portrayal of her in the autobiographical novel Sons
and Lovers. But Lawrence remained a lifelong obsession for her.
In 1913, a young English woman named Ivy Low, who had read
Lawrence's novels, began to correspond with him, her letters gushing with
admiration. By now Lawrence was married, to a German woman, the
Baroness Frieda von Richthofen. To Low's surprise, though, he invited her
to visit him and his wife in Italy. She knew he was probably something of a
Don Juan, but was eager to meet him, and accepted his invitation.
Lawrence was not what she had expected: his voice was high-pitched, his
eyes were piercing, and there was something vaguely feminine about him.
Soon they were taking walks together, with Lawrence confiding in Low.
She felt that they were becoming friends, which delighted her. Then sud-
denly, just before she was to leave, he launched into a series of criticisms of
her—she was so unspontaneous, so predictable, less human being than ro-
bot. Devastated by this unexpected attack, she nevertheless had to agree—
what he had said was true. What could he have seen in her in the first
place? Who was she anyway? Low left Italy feeling empty—but then
Lawrence continued to write to her, as if nothing had happened. She soon
realized that she had fallen hopelessly in love with him, despite everything
he had said to her. Or was it not despite what he had said, but because of it?
In 1914, the writer John Middleton-Murry received a letter from
Lawrence, a good friend of his. In the letter, out of nowhere, Lawrence
criticized Middleton-Murry for being passionless and not gallant enough
with his wife, the novelist Katherine Mansfield. Middleton-Murry later
wrote, "I had never felt for a man before what his letter made me feel for
him. It was a new thing, a unique thing, in my experience; and it was to re-
main unique." He felt that beneath Lawrence's criticisms lay some weird
kind of affection. Whenever he saw Lawrence from then on, he felt a
strange physical attraction that he could not explain.
Interpretation. The number of women, and of men, who fell under
Lawrence's spell is astonishing given how unpleasant he could be. In almost
every case the relationship began in friendship—with frank talks, exchanges
of confidences, a spiritual bond. Then, invariably, he would suddenly turn
against them, voicing harsh personal criticisms. He would know them well
by that time, and the criticisms were often quite accurate, and hit a nerve.
This would inevitably trigger confusion in his victims, and a sense of anxi-
ety, a feeling that something was wrong with them. Jolted out of their usual
sense of normality, they would feel divided inside. With half of their minds"What can Love be
then?" I said. "A
mortal?" "Far from it."
"Well, what?" "As in my
previous examples, he is
half-way between mortal
and immortal." What sort
of being is he then,
Diotima?" "He is a great
spirit, Socrates; everything
that is of the nature of a
spirit is half-god and half-
man." . . . "Who are his
parents?" I asked. "That
is rather a long story," she
answered, "but I will tell
you. On the day that
Aphrodite was born the
gods were feasting, among
them Contrivance the son
of Invention; and after
dinner, seeing that a party
was in progress, Poverty
came to beg and stood at
the door. Now Contrivance
was drunk with nectar—
wine, I may say, had not
yet been discovered—and
went out into the garden of
Zeus, and was overcome by
sleep. So Poverty, thinking
to alleviate her wretched
condition by bearing a child
to Contrivance, lay with
him and conceived Love.
Since Love was begotten on
Aphrodite's birthday, and
since he has also an innate
passion for the beautiful,
and so for the beauty of
Aphrodite herself, he
became her follower and
servant. Again, having
Contrivance for his father
and Poverty for his
mother, he bears the
following character. He is
always poor, and, far from
being sensitive and
beautiful, as most people
imagine, he is hard and
weather-beaten, shoeless
and homeless, always
sleeping out for want of a
bed, on the ground, on
doorsteps, and in the street.
So far he takes after his
mother and lives in want.
But, being also his father's
Create a Need—Stir Anxiety and Discontent • 207
they wondered why he was doing this, and felt he was unfair; with the
other half, they believed it was all true. Then, in those moments of self-
doubt, they would get a letter or a visit from him in which he was his old
charming self.
Now they saw him differently Now they were weak and vulnerable, in
need of something; and he would seem so strong. Now he drew them to
him, feelings of friendship turning into affection and desire. Once they felt
uncertain about themselves, they were susceptible to falling in love.
Most of us protect ourselves from the harshness of life by succumbing
to routines and patterns, by closing ourselves off from others. But underly-
ing these habits is a tremendous sense of insecurity and defensiveness. We
feel we are not really living. The seducer must pick at this wound and bring
these semiconscious thoughts into full awareness. This was what Lawrence
did: his sudden, brutally unexpected jabs would hit people at their weak
spot.
Although Lawrence had great success with his frontal approach, it is
often better to stir thoughts of inadequacy and uncertainty indirectly, by
hinting at comparisons to yourself or to others, and by insinuating some-
how that your victims' lives are less grand than they had imagined. You
want them to feel at war with themselves, torn in two directions, and anx-
ious about it. Anxiety, a feeling of lack and need, is the precursor of all de-
sire. These jolts in the victim's mind create space for you to insinuate your
poison, the siren call of adventure or fulfillment that will make them follow
you into your web. Without anxiety and a sense of lack there can be no
seduction.
Desire and love have for their object things or qualities
which a man does not at present possess but which he
lacks.
—SOCRATES
Keys to Seduction
Everyone wears a mask in society; we pretend to be more sure of our-
selves than we are. We do not want other people to glimpse that
doubting self within us. In truth, our egos and personalities are much more
fragile than they appear to be; they cover up feelings of confusion and
emptiness. As a seducer, you must never mistake a person's appearance for
the reality. People are always susceptible to being seduced, because in fact
everyone lacks a sense of completeness, feels something missing deep in-
side. Bring their doubts and anxieties to the surface and they can be led and
lured to follow you.
No one can see you as someone to follow or fall in love with unless
they first reflect on themselves somehow, and on what they are missing. Be-
fore the seduction proceeds, you must place a mirror in front of them inson, he schemes to get for
himself whatever is
beautiful and good; he is
bold and forward and
strenuous, always devising
tricks like a cunning
huntsman."
—PLATO, SYMPOSIUM,
TRANSLATED BY WALTER
HAMILTON
We are all like pieces of the
coins that children break in
half for keepsakes—
making two out of one,
like the flatfish—and each
of us is forever seeking the
half that will tally with
himself . . . And so all
this to-do is a relic of that
original state of ours when
we were whole, and now,
when we are longing for
and following after that
primeval wholeness, we say
we are in love.
—ARISTOPHANES'S SPEECH IN
PLATO'S SYMPOSIUM, QUOTED IN
JAMES MANDRELL, DON JUAN
AND THE POINT OF HONOR
Don John: Well met,
pretty lass! What! Are
there such handsome
Creatures as you amongst
these Fields, these Trees,
and Rocks? • Charlotta: I
am as you see, Sir. • Don
John: Are you of this
Village? • Charlotta: Yes,
Sir. • Don John: What's
your name? • Charlotta:
Charlotta, Sir, at your
Service. • Don John: Ah
what a fine Person 'tis!
What piercing Eyes! •
Charlotta: Sir, you make
me ashamed. . . . • Don
John: Pretty Charlotta,
you are not marry'd, are
you? • Charlotta: No, Sir,
but I am soon to be, with
Pierrot, son to Goody
Simonetta. • Don John:
What! Shou'd such a one
as you be Wife to a
