The Sensualist. What marks these types is not their love of pleasure
but their overactive senses. Sometimes they show this quality in their
appearance—their interest in fashion, color, style. But sometimes it is
more subtle: because they are so sensitive, they are often quite shy, and
they will shrink from standing out or being flamboyant. You will recog-
nize them by how responsive they are to their environment, how they
cannot stand a room without sunlight, are depressed by certain colors, or
excited by certain smells. They happen to live in a culture that deempha-
sizes sensual experience (except perhaps for the sense of sight). And so
what the Sensualist lacks is precisely enough sensual experiences to appre-
ciate and relish.
The key to seducing them is to aim for their senses, to take them to
beautiful places, pay attention to detail, envelop them in spectacle, and of
course use plenty of physical lures. Sensualists, like animals, can be baited
with colors and smells. Appeal to as many senses as possible, keeping your
targets distracted and weak. Seductions of Sensualists are often easy and
quick, and you can use the same tactics again and again to keep them inter-
ested, although it is wise to vary your sensual appeals somewhat, in kind if
not in quality. That is how Cleopatra worked on Mark Antony, an inveter-
ate Sensualist. These types make superb victims because they are relatively
docile if you give them what they want.
The Lonely Leader. Powerful people are not necessarily different from
everyone else, but they are treated differently, and this has a big effect on
their personalities. Everyone around them tends to be fawning and
courtierlike, to have an angle, to want something from them. This makes
them suspicious and distrustful, and a little hard around the edges, but do
not mistake the appearance for the reality: Lonely Leaders long to be se-
duced, to have someone break through their isolation and overwhelm
them. The problem is that most people are too intimidated to try, or use
the kind of tactics—flattery, charm—that they see through and despise. To
seduce such types, it is better to act like their equal or even their superior—
the kind of treatment they never get. If you are blunt with them you will
seem genuine, and they will be touched—you care enough to be honest,
even perhaps at some risk. (Being blunt with the powerful can be danger-
ous.) Lonely Leaders can be made emotional by inflicting some pain, fol-
lowed by tenderness.
This is one of the hardest types to seduce, not only because they are
suspicious but because their minds are burdened with cares and responsi-
bilities. They have less mental space for a seduction. You will have to be pa-
tient and clever, slowly filling their minds with thoughts of you. Succeed,
though, and you can gain great power in turn, for in their loneliness they
will come to depend on you.The Seducer's Victims—The Eighteen Types • 159
160 • The Art of Seduction
The Floating Gender. All of us have a mix of the masculine and the
feminine in our characters, but most of us learn to develop and exhibit the
socially acceptable side while repressing the other. People of the Floating
Gender type feel that the separation of the sexes into such distinct genders
is a burden. They are sometimes thought to be repressed or latent homo-
sexuals, but this is a misunderstanding: they may well be heterosexual but
their masculine and feminine sides are in flux, and because this may dis-
comfit others if they show it, they learn to repress it, perhaps by going to
one extreme. They would actually love to be able to play with their gender,
to give full expression to both sides. Many people fall into this type without
its being obvious: a woman may have a masculine energy, a man a devel-
oped aesthetic side. Do not look for obvious signs, because these types
often go underground, keeping it under wraps. This makes them vulnera-
ble to a powerful seduction.
What Floating Gender types are really looking for is another person of
uncertain gender, their counterpart from the opposite sex. Show them that
in your presence and they can relax, express the repressed side of their char-
acter. If you have such proclivities, this is the one instance where it would
be best to seduce the same type of the opposite sex. Each person will stir
up repressed desires in the other and will suddenly have license to explore
all kinds of gender combinations, without fear of judgment. If you are not
of the Floating Gender, leave this type alone. You will only inhibit them
and create more discomfort.
