The Siren • 15
mous daughter of Queen Catherine de Médicis of France, was one of the
first women ever to incorporate decolletage in her wardrobe, simply be-
cause she had the most beautiful breasts in the realm. For Josephine Bona-
parte it was her arms, which she carefully always left bare.
Movement and demeanor. In the fifth century B.C., King Kou Chien
chose the Chinese Siren Hsi Shih from among all the women of his realm
to seduce and destroy his rival Fu Chai, King of Wu; for this purpose, he
had the young woman instructed in the arts of seduction. Most important
of these was movement—how to move gracefully and suggestively. Hsi
Shih learned to give the impression of floating across the floor in her court
robes. When she was finally unleashed on Fu Chai, he quickly fell under
her spell. She walked and moved like no one he had ever seen. He became
obsessed with her tremulous presence, her manner and nonchalant air. Fu
Chai fell so deeply in love that he let his kingdom fall to pieces, allowing
Kou Chien to march in and conquer it without a fight.
The Siren moves gracefully and unhurriedly. The proper gestures,
movement, and demeanor for a Siren are like the proper voice: they hint at
something exciting, stirring desire without being obvious. Your air must be
languorous, as if you had all the time in the world for love and pleasure.
Your gestures must have a certain ambiguity, suggesting something both
innocent and erotic. Anything that cannot immediately be understood is
supremely seductive, and all the more so if it permeates your manner.
Symbol: Water.
The song of the Siren is liquid and
enticing, and the Siren herself is fluid and un-
graspable. Like the sea, the Siren lures you with the
promise of infinite adventure and pleasure. Forgetting past
and future, men follow her far out to sea, where they drown.
16 • The Art of Seduction
Dangers
No matter how enlightened the age, no woman can maintain the image
of being devoted to pleasure completely comfortably. And no matter
how hard she tries to distance herself from it, the taint of being easy always
follows the Siren. Cleopatra was hated in Rome as the Egyptian whore.
That hatred eventually lead to her downfall, as Octavius and the Roman
army sought to extirpate the stain on Roman manhood that she came to
represent. Even so, men are often forgiving when it comes to the Siren's
reputation. But danger often lies in the envy she stirs up among other
women; much of Rome's hatred for Cleopatra originated in the resentment
she provoked among the city's stern matrons. By playing up her innocence,
by making herself seem the victim of male desire, the Siren can somewhat
blunt the effects of feminine envy. But on the whole there is little she can
do—her power comes from her effect on men, and she must learn to ac-
cept, or ignore, the envy of other women.
Finally, the intense attention that the Siren attracts can prove irritating
and worse. Sometimes she will pine for relief from it; sometimes, too, she
will want to attract an attention that is not sexual. Also, unfortunately,
physical beauty fades; although the Siren effect depends not on a beautiful
face but on an overall impression, past a certain age that impression gets
hard to project. Both of these factors contributed to the suicide of Marilyn
Monroe. It takes a genius on the level of Madame de Pompadour, the Siren
mistress of King Louis XV, to make the transition into the role of the spir-
ited older woman who continues to seduce with her nonphysical charms.
Cleopatra had such an intellect, and had she lived long enough, she would
have remained a potent seductress for many years. The Siren must prepare
for age by paying attention early on to the more psychological, less physical
forms of coquetry that can continue to bring her power once her beauty
starts to fade.
