Give Them Space to Fall—The Pursuer Is Pursued • 387
Baudelaire appeared at the appointed hour. He sat nervously in his seat,
gazing at her with his large eyes, saying little, and what he did say was for-
mal and polite. He seemed aloof. After he left a kind of panic seized
Madame Sabatier, and the next day she wrote him a first letter of her own:
"Today I'm more calm, and I can feel more clearly the impression of our
Tuesday evening together. I can tell you, without the danger of your think-
ing I'm exaggerating, that I'm the happiest woman on the face of the earth,
that I've never felt more truly that I love you, and that I've never seen you
look more beautiful, more adorable, my divine friend!"
Madame Sabatier had never before written such a letter; she had always
been the one who was pursued. Now she had lost her usual self-possession.
And it only got worse: Baudelaire did not answer right away. When she saw
him next, he was colder than before. She had the feeling there was some-
one else, that his old mistress, Jeanne Duval, had suddenly reappeared in his
life and was pulling him away from her. One night she turned aggressive,
embracing him, trying to kiss him, but he did not respond, and quickly
found an excuse to leave. Why was he suddenly inaccessible? She began to
flood him with letters, begging him to come to her. Unable to sleep, she
would wait all night for him to show up. She had never experienced such
desperation. Somehow she had to seduce him, possess him, have him all
to herself. She tried everything—letters, coquetry, all kinds of promises—
until he finally wrote that he was no longer in love with her and that was
that.
Interpretation. Baudelaire was an intellectual seducer. He wanted to over-
whelm Madame Sabatier with words, dominate her thoughts, make her fall
in love with him. Physically, he knew, he could not compete with her
many other admirers—he was shy, awkward, not particularly handsome. So
he resorted to his one strength, poetry. Haunting her with anonymous let-
ters gave him a perverse thrill. He had to know she would realize, eventu-
ally, that he was her correspondent—no one else wrote like him—but he
wanted her to figure this out on her own. He stopped writing to her be-
cause he had become interested in someone else, but he knew she would be
thinking of him, wondering, perhaps waiting for him. And when he pub-
lished his book, he decided to write to her again, this time directly, stirring
up the old venom he had injected in her. When they were alone, he could
see she was waiting for him to do something, to take hold of her, but he
was not that kind of seducer. Besides, it gave him pleasure to hold himself
back, to sense his power over a woman whom so many desired. By the time
she turned physical and aggressive, the seduction was over for him. He had
made her fall in love; that was enough.
The devastating effect of Baudelaire's push-and-pull on Madame
Sabatier teaches us a great lesson in seduction. First, it is always best to keep
at some distance from your targets. You do not have to go as far as remain-
ing anonymous, but you do not want to be seen too often, or to be seen asand the seas will dry up
first! Oh, misery! How it
would have brought me
comfort and healing if I
had held him in my arms
once before he died. How?
Yes, quite naked next to
him, in order to enjoy him
fully. ..."•.. . When
they came within six or
seven leagues of the castle
where King Bademagu was
staying, news that was
pleasing came to him about
Lancelot—news that he
was glad to hear; Lancelot
was alive and was
returning, hale and hearty.
He behaved most properly
in going to inform the
queen. "Good sir," she
told him, "I believe it,
since you have told me.
But were he dead, I assure
you that I could never
again be happy."
•... Now Lancelot had
his every wish: the queen
willingly sought his
company and affection as
he held her in his arms and
she held him in hers. Her
love-play seemed so gentle
and good to him, both her
kisses and caresses, that in
truth the two of them felt a
joy and wonder of which
has never been heard or
known. But I shall let it
remain a secret for ever,
since it should not be
written of: the most
delightful and choicest
pleasure is that which is
hinted at, but never told.
—CHRÉTIEN DE TROYES,
ARTHURIAN ROMANCES,
TRANSLATED BY WILLIAM W.
KIBLER
He was sometimes so
intellectual that I felt
myself annihilated as a
woman; at other times
he was so wild and
passionate, so desiring,
that I almost trembled
388 • The Art of Seduction
intrusive. If you are always in their face, always the aggressor, they will be-
come used to being passive, and the tension in your seduction will flag. Use
letters to make them think about you all the time, to feed their imagina-
tion. Cultivate mystery—stop them from figuring you out. Baudelaire's let-
ters were delightfully ambiguous, mixing the physical and the spiritual,
teasing Sabatier with their multiplicity of possible interpretations.
Then, at the point when they are ripe with desire and interest, when
perhaps they are expecting you to make a move—as Madame Sabatier ex-
pected that day in her apartment—take a step back. You are unexpectedly
distant, friendly but no more than that—certainly not sexual. Let this sink
in for a day or two. Your withdrawal will trigger anxiety; the only way to
relieve this anxiety is to pursue and possess you. Step back now and you
make your targets fall into your arms like ripe fruit, blind to the force of
gravity that is drawing them to you. The more they participate, the more
their willpower is engaged, the deeper the erotic effect. You have chal-
lenged them to use their own seductive powers on you, and when they re-
spond, the tables will turn and they will pursue you with desperate energy.
/ retreat and thereby teach her to be victorious as she pur-
sues me. I continually fall back, and in this backward
movement I teach her to know through me all the powers of
erotic love, its turbulent thoughts, its passion, what longing
is, and hope, and impatient expectancy.
—SØREN KIERKEGAARD
Keys to Seduction
Since humans are naturally obstinate and willful creatures, and prone to
suspicions of people's motives, it is only natural, in the course of any se-
duction, that in some ways your target will resist you. Seductions, then, are
rarely easy or without setbacks. But once your victims overcome some of
their doubts, and begin to fall under your spell, they will reach a point
where they start to let go. They may sense that you are leading them along,
but they are enjoying it. No one likes things to be complicated and diffi-
cult, and your target will expect the conclusion to come quickly. That is
the point, however, where you must train yourself to hold back. Deliver
the pleasurable climax they are so greedily awaiting, succumb to the natural
tendency to bring the seduction to a rapid end, and you will have missed an
opportunity to ratchet up the tension, to make the affair more heated. After
all, you don't want a passive little victim to toy with; you want the seduced
to engage their will in all its force, to become active participants in the se-
duction. You want them to pursue you, hopelessly ensnaring themselves in
your web in the process. The only way to accomplish this is to take a step
back and make them anxious.
You have strategically retreated before (see chapter 12), but this is dif-before him. At times I was
like a stranger to him; at
times he surrendered
completely. Then when I
threw my arms around
him, everything changed,
and I embraced a cloud.
—CORDELIA DESCRIBING
JOHANNES, IN SØREN
KIERKEGAARD, THE SEDUCER'S
DIARY, TRANSLATED BY HOWARD
V. HONG AND EDNA V. HONG
It is true that we could not
love if there were not some
memory in us—to the
greatest extent an
unconscious memory—that
we were once loved. But
neither could we love if this
feeling of being loved had
not at some time suffered
doubt; if we had always
been sure of it. In other
words, love would not be
possible without having
been loved and then having
missed the certainty of
being loved. . . . • The
need to be loved is not
elementary. This need is
certainly acquired by
experience in later
childhood. It would be
better to say: by many
experiences or by a
repetition of similar ones. I
believe that these
experiences are of a
negative kind. The child
becomes aware that he is
not loved or that his
mother's love is not
unconditional. The baby
learns that his mother can
be dissatisfied with him,
that she can withdraw her
affection if he does not
behave as she wishes, that
she can be angry or cross. I
believe that this experience
arouses feelings of anxiety
in the infant. The
possibility of losing his
mother's love certainly
strikes the child with a
force which can no more be
