xiv • Contents
5 Create a Need—Stir Anxiety and Discontent page 203
A perfectly satisfied person cannot be seduced. Tension and disharmony must be instilled in
your targets minds. Stir within them feelings of discontent, an unhappiness with their circum-
stances and with themselves. The feelings of inadequacy that you create will give you space to
insinuate yourself, to make them see you as the answer to their problems. Pain and anxiety are
the proper precursors to pleasure. Learn to manufacture the need that you can fill.
6 Master the Art of Insinuation page 211
Making your targets feel dissatisfied and in need of your attention is essential, but if you are
too obvious, they will see through you and grow defensive. There is no known defense, how-
ever, against insinuation—the art of planting ideas in people's minds by dropping elusive hints
that take root days later, even appearing to them as their own idea. Create a sublanguage—
bold statements followed by retraction and apology, ambiguous comments, banal talk combined
with alluring glances—that enters the target's unconscious to convey your real meaning. Make
everything suggestive.
7 Enter Their Spirit page 219
Most people are locked in their own worlds, making them stubborn and hard to persuade. The
way to lure them out of their shell and set up your seduction is to enter their spirit. Play by
their rules, enjoy what they enjoy, adapt yourself to their moods. In doing so you will stroke
their deep-rooted narcissism and lower their defenses. Indulge your targets' every mood and
whim, giving them nothing to react against or resist.
8 Create Temptation page 229
Lure the target deep into your seduction by creating the proper temptation: a glimpse of the
pleasures to come. As the serpent tempted Eve with the promise of forbidden knowledge, you
must awaken a desire in your targets that they cannot control. Find that weakness of theirs,
that fantasy that has yet to be realized, and hint that you can lead them toward it. The key is
to keep it vague. Stimulate a curiosity stronger than the doubts and anxieties that go with it,
and they will follow you.
Phase Two: Lead Astray—Creating Pleasure and Confusion
9 Keep Them in Suspense—What Comes Next? page 241
The moment people feel they know what to expect from you, your spell on them is broken.
More: You have ceded them power. The only way to lead the seduced along and keep the up-
per hand is to create suspense, a calculated surprise. Doing something they do not expect from
you will give them a delightful sense of spontaneity—they will not be able to foresee what
comes next. You are always one step ahead and in control. Give the victim a thrill with a sud-
den change of direction.
Contents • xv
10 Use the Demonic Power of Words to Sow Confusion page 251
It is hard to make people listen; they are consumed with their own thoughts and desires, and
have little time for yours. The trick to making them listen is to say what they want to hear, to
fill their ears with whatever is pleasant to them. This is the essence of seductive language. In-
flame people's emotions with loaded phrases, flatter them, comfort their insecurities, envelop
them in sweet words and promises, and not only will they listen to you, they will lose their
will to resist you.
11 Pay Attention to Detail page 265
Lofty words of love and grand gestures can be suspicious: Why are you trying so hard to
please? The details of a seduction—the subtle gestures, the offhand things you do—are often
more charming and revealing. You must learn to distract your victims with a myriad of pleas-
ant little rituals—thoughtful gifts tailored just for them, clothes and adornments designed to
please them, gestures that show the time and attention you are paying them. Mesmerized by
what they see, they will not notice what you are really up to.
12 Poeticize Your Presence page 277
Important things happen when your targets are alone: The slightest feeling of relief that you
are not there, and it is all over. Familiarity and overexposure will cause this reaction. Remain
elusive, then. Intrigue your targets by alternating an exciting presence with a cool distance,
exuberant moments followed by calculated absences. Associate yourself with poetic images and
objects, so that when they think of you, they begin to see you through an idealized halo. The
more you figure in their minds, the more they will envelop you in seductive fantasies.
13 Disarm Through Strategic Weakness and Vulnerability page 285
Too much maneuvering on your part may raise suspicion. The best way to cover your tracks is
to make the other person feel superior and stronger. If you seem to be weak, vulnerable, en-
thralled by the other person, and unable to control yourself you will make your actions look
more natural, less calculated. Physical weakness—tears, bashfulness, paleness—will help cre-
ate the effect. Play the victim, then transform your target's sympathy into love.
14 Confuse Desire and Reality—The Perfect Illusion page 295
To compensate for the difficulties in their lives, people spend a lot of their time daydreaming,
imagining a future full of adventure, success, and romance. If you can create the illusion that
through you they can live out their dreams, you will have them at your mercy. Aim at secret
wishes that have been thwarted or repressed, stirring up uncontrollable emotions, clouding their
powers of reason. Lead the seduced to a point of confusion in which they can no longer tell the
difference between illusion and reality.
15 Isolate the Victim page 309
An isolated person is weak. By slowly isolating your victims, you make them more vulnerable
to your influence. Take them away from their normal milieu, friends, family, home. Give them
the sense of being marginalized, in limbo—they are leaving one world behind and entering
another. Once isolated like this, they have no outside support, and in their confusion they are
easily led astray. Lure the seduced into your lair, where nothing is familiar.
