324 • The Art of Seduction
moments, or even manufacture them, as a kind of test: will you retreat? Or
will you rise to the occasion? You cannot hesitate or flinch, even for a mo-
ment, or all is lost. If necessary, make the deed seem to have cost you more
than it has, never with words, but indirectly—exhausted looks, reports
spread through a third party, whatever it takes.
The second way to prove yourself is the brave deed that you plan and
execute in advance, on your own and at the right moment—preferably
some way into the seduction, when any doubts the victim still has about
you are more dangerous than earlier on. Choose a dramatic, difficult action
that reveals the painful time and effort involved. Danger can be extremely
seductive. Cleverly lead your victim into a crisis, a moment of danger, or
indirectly put them in an uncomfortable position, and you can play the res-
cuer, the gallant knight. The powerful feelings and emotions this elicits can
easily be redirected into love.
Some Examples
1. In France in the 1640s, Marion de l'Orme was the courtesan men lusted
after the most. Renowned for her beauty, she had been the mistress of Car-
dinal Richelieu, among other notable political and military figures. To win
her bed was a sign of achievement.
For weeks the rake Count Grammont had wooed de l'Orme, and fi-
nally she had given him an appointment for a particular evening. The count
prepared himself for a delightful encounter, but on the day of the appoint-
ment he received a letter from her in which she expressed, in polite and
tender terms, her terrible regrets—she had the most awful headache, and
would have to stay in bed that evening. Their appointment would have to
be postponed. The count felt certain he was being pushed to the side for
someone else, for de l'Orme was as capricious as she was beautiful.
Grammont did not hesitate. At nightfall he rode to the Marais, where
de l'Orme lived, and scouted the area. In a square near her home he spot-
ted a man approaching on foot. Recognizing the Duc de Brissac, he imme-
diately knew that this man was to supplant him in the courtesan's bed.
Brissac seemed unhappy to see the count, and so Grammont approached
him hurriedly and said, "Brissac, my friend, you must do me a service of
the greatest importance: I have an appointment, for the first time, with a
girl who lives near this place; and as this visit is only to concert measures, I
shall make but a very short stay. Be so kind as to lend me your cloak, and
walk my horse a little, until I return; but above all, do not go far from this
place." Without waiting for an answer, Grammont took the duke's cloak
and handed him the bridle of his horse. Looking back, he saw that Brissac
was watching him, so he pretended to enter a house, slipped out through
the back, circled around, and reached de l'Orme's house without being
seen.greater effort is cherished
more dearly than what is
gained with little trouble.
As the proverb says:
'Prizes great cannot be
won unless some heavy
labor's done.'" • The
woman says: "If no great
prizes can be won unless
some heavy labor's done,
you must suffer the
exhaustion of many toils to
be able to attain the favors
you seek, since what you
ask for is a greater prize."
• The man says: "I give
you all the thanks that I
can express for so sagely
promising me your love
when I have performed
great toils. God forbid that
I or any other could win
the love of so worthy a
woman without first
attaining it by many
labors."
—ANDREAS CAPELLANUS
ON LOVE, TRANSLATED BY
P. G.WALSH
One day, [Saint-Preuil]
pleaded more than usual
that [Madame de la
Maisonfort] grant him the
ultimate favors a woman
could offer, and he went
beyond just words in his
pleading. Madame, saying
he had gone way too far,
ordered him to never ever
appear before her again.
He left her room. Only an
hour later, the lady was
taking her customary walk
along one of those beautiful
canals at Bagnolet, when
Saint-Preuil leapt out from
behind a hedge, totally
naked, and standing before
his mistress in this state, he
cried out, "For the last
time, Madame—
Goodbye!" Thereupon, he
threw himself into the
canal, head first. The lady,
terrified by such a sight,
Prove Yourself • 325
Grammont knocked at the door, and a servant, mistaking him for the
duke, let him in. He headed straight for the lady's chamber, where he found
her lying on a couch, in a sheer gown. He threw off Brissac's cloak and she
gasped in fright. "What is the matter, my fair one?" he asked. "Your
headache, to all appearance, is gone?" She seemed put out, exclaimed she
still had the headache, and insisted that he leave. It was up to her, she said,
to make or break appointments. "Madam," Grammont said calmly, "I know
what perplexes you: you are afraid lest Brissac should meet me here; but
you may make yourself easy on that account." He then opened the window
and revealed Brissac out in the square, dutifully walking back and forth
with a horse, like a common stable boy. He looked ridiculous; de l'Orme
burst out laughing, threw her arms around the count, and exclaimed, "My
dear Chevalier, I can hold out no longer; you are too amiable and too ec-
centric not to be pardoned." He told her the whole story, and she promised
that the duke could exercise horses all night, but she would not let him in.
They made an appointment for the following evening. Outside, the count
returned the cloak, apologized for taking so long, and thanked the duke.
Brissac was most gracious, even holding Grammont's horse for him to
mount, and waving goodbye as he rode off.
Interpretation. Count Grammont knew that most would-be seducers give
up too easily, mistaking capriciousness or apparent coolness as a sign of a
genuine lack of interest. In fact it can mean many things: perhaps the per-
son is testing you, wondering if you are really serious. Prickly behavior is
exactly this kind of test—if you give up at the first sign of difficulty, you
obviously do not want them that much. Or it could be that they themselves
are uncertain about you, or are trying to choose between you and someone
else. In any event, it is absurd to give up. One incontrovertible demonstra-
tion of how far you are willing to go will overwhelm all doubts. It will also
defeat your rivals, since most people are timid, worried about making fools
of themselves, and so rarely risk anything.
When dealing with difficult or resistant targets, it is usually best to im-
provise, the way Grammont did. If your action seems sudden and a sur-
prise, it will make them more emotional, loosen them up. A little
roundabout accumulation of information—a little spying—is always a
good idea. Most important is the spirit in which you enact your proof. If
you are lighthearted and playful, if you make the target laugh, proving
yourself and amusing them at the same time, it won't matter if you mess
up, or if they see you have employed a little trickery. They will give in to
the pleasant mood you have created. Notice that the count never whined
or grew angry or defensive. All he had to do was pull back the curtain and
reveal the duke walking his horse, melting de l'Orme's resistance with
laughter. In one well-executed act, he showed what he would do for a
night of her favors.began to cry and to run in
the direction of her house,
where upon arriving, she
fainted. As soon as she
could speak, she ordered
that someone go and see
what had happened to
Saint-Preuil, who in truth
had not stayed very long in
the canal, and having
quickly put his clothes back
on, hurried to Paris where
he hid himself for several
days. Meanwhile, the
rumor spread that he had
died. Madame de la
Maisnnfort was deeply
moved by the extreme
measures he had adopted
to prove his sentiments.
This act of his appeared to
her to be a sign of an
extraordinary love; and
having perhaps noticed
some charms in his naked
presence that she had not
seen fully clothed, she
deeply regretted her cruelty,
and publicly stated her
feeling of loss. Word of this
reached Saint-Preuil, and
he immediately resurrected
himself and did not lose
time in taking advantage of
such a favorable feeling in
his mistress.
—COUNT BUSSY-RABUTIN,
HISTOIRES AMOUREUSES DES
GAULES
To become a lady's
vassal . . . the troubadour
was expected to pass
through four stages, i.e.:
aspirant, supplicant,
postulant, and lover.
When he had attained the
last stage of amorous
initiation he made a vow of
fidelity and this homage
was sealed by a kiss. • In
this idealistic form of
courtly love reserved for the
aristocratic elite of chivalry,
the phenomenon of love
was considered to be a state
