420 • The Art of Seduction
go on forever. No more mystery, no more coquetry, no more retreats—-just
endless love. Few can endure such a threat. A few weeks of it and they will
be gone.
2. King Charles II of England was a devoted libertine. He kept a stable of
lovers: there was always a favorite mistress from the aristocracy, and count-
less other less important women. He craved variety. One evening in 1668,
the king spent an evening at the theater, where he conceived a sudden de-
sire for a young actress called Nell Gwyn. She was pretty and innocent
looking (only eighteen at the time), with a girlish glow in her cheeks, but
the lines she recited onstage were so impudent and saucy. Deeply excited,
the king decided he had to have her. After the performance he took her
out for a night of drinking and merriment, then led her to his royal bed.
Nell was the daughter of a fishmonger, and had begun by selling or-
anges in the theater. She rose to the status of actress by sleeping with writ-
ers and other theater men. She had no shame about this. (When a footman
of hers got into a fight with someone who said he worked for a whore, she
broke it up by saying, "I am a whore. Find something better to fight
about.") Nell's humor and sass amused the king greatly, but she was low-
born, and an actress, and he could hardly make her a favorite. After several
nights with "pretty, witty Nell," he returned to his principal mistress,
Louise Keroualle, a well-born Frenchwoman.
Keroualle was a clever seductress. She played hard to get, and made it
clear she would not give the king her virginity until he had promised her a
title. It was the kind of chase Charles enjoyed, and he made her the
Duchess of Portsmouth. But soon her greed and difficultness began to wear
on his nerves. To divert himself, he turned back to Nell. Whenever he vis-
ited her, he was royally entertained with food, drink, and her great good
humor. The king was bored or melancholy? She took him drinking or
gambling, or out to the country, where she taught him to fish. She always
had a pleasant surprise up her sleeve. What he loved most of all was her
wit, the way she mocked the pretentious Keroualle. The duchess had the
habit of going into mourning whenever a nobleman of another country
died, as if he were a relation. Nell, too, would show up at the palace on
these occasions dressed in black, and would sorrowfully say that she was
mourning for the "Cham of Tartary" or the "Boog of Oronooko"—grand
relatives of her own. To her face, she called the duchess "Squintabella" and
the "Weeping Willow," because of her simpering manners and melancholic
airs. Soon the king was spending more time with Nell than with the
duchess. By the time Keroualle fell out of favor, Nell had in essence be-
come the king's favorite, which she remained until his death, in 1685.
Interpretation. Nell Gwyn was ambitious. She wanted power and fame,
but in the seventeenth century the only way a woman could get thosechampagne, wine and that
rarity in Paris . . . Scotch.
The people, aristocrats and
servants, some on their
hands and knees, were
busily searching for
something on the floor. A
duchess, who was one of
the hostesses, had lost one
of her larger diamonds. . . .
The duchess finally got
bored seeing people looking
all over the floor for the
ring. She looked around
haughtily, then took Duke
by the arm, saying, "It
doesn't mean anything. I
can always get diamonds,
but how often can I get a
man like Duke
Ellington?" • She
disappeared with Duke.
The band started the
second half by themselves,
and eventually Duke
smilingly reappeared to
finish the concert.
—DON GEORGE, SWEET MAN:
THE REAL DUKE ELLINGTON
I do know, however, that
men become bigger-hearted
and better lovers once they
get the suspicion that their
mistresses care less about
them. When a man
believes himself to be the
one and only lover in a
woman's life, he'll whistle
and go his way. • / ought
to know; I have followed
this profession for the last
twenty years. If you want
me to, I will tell you what
happened to me a few years
ago. • At that time I had a
steady lover, a certain
Demophantos, a usurer
living near Poikile. He had
never given me more than
five drachmas and he
pretended to be my man.
But his love was only
superficial, Chrysis. He
never sighed, he never shed
tears for me and he never
spent the night waiting at
Beware the Aftereffects • 421
things was through a man—and who better than the king? But to get in-
volved with Charles was a dangerous game. A man like him, easily bored
and in need of variety, would use her for a fling, then find someone else.
Nell's strategy for the problem was simple: she let the king have his
other girls, and never complained. Every time he saw her, though, she
made sure he was entertained and diverted. She filled his senses with plea-
sure, acting as if his position had nothing to do with her love for him. Vari-
ety in women could wear on the nerves, tiring a busy king. They all made
so many demands. If one woman could provide the same variety (and Nell,
as an actress, knew how to play different roles), she had a big advantage.
Nell never asked for money, so Charles plied her with wealth. She never
asked to be the favorite—how could she? She was a commoner—but he ele-
vated her to the position.
Many of your targets will be like kings and queens, particularly those
who are easily bored. Once the seduction is over they will not only have
trouble idealizing you, they may also turn to another man or woman whose
unfamiliarity seems exciting and poetic. Needing other people to divert
them, they often satisfy this need through variety. Do not play into the
hands of these bored royals by complaining, becoming self-pitying, or de-
manding privileges. That would only further their natural disenchantment
once the seduction is over. Instead, make them see that you are not the per-
son they thought you were. Make it a delightful game to play new roles, to
surprise them, to be an endless source of entertainment. It is almost impos-
sible to resist a person who provides pleasure with no strings attached.
When they are with you, keep the spirit light and playful. Play up the parts
of your character they find delightful, but never let them feel they know
you too well. In the end you will control the dynamic, and a haughty king
or queen will become your abject slave.
3. When the great jazz composer Duke Ellington came to town, he and his
band were always a big attraction, but especially so for the ladies of the area.
They came to hear his music, of course, but once there they were mesmer-
ized by "the Duke" himself. Onstage, Ellington was relaxed and elegant,
and seemed to be having such a good time. His face was very handsome,
and his bedroom eyes were infamous. (He slept very little, and his eyes had
permanent pouches under them.) After the performance, some woman
would inevitably invite him to her table, another would sneak into his
dressing room, yet another would approach him on his way out. Duke
made a point of being accessible, and when he kissed a woman's hand, his
eyes and hers would meet for a moment. Sometimes she would signal an
interest in him, and his glance in return would say he was more than ready.
Sometimes his eyes were the first to speak; few women could resist that
look, even the most happily married.
With the night's music still ringing in her ears, the woman would show
up at Ellington's hotel room. He would be dressed in a stylish suit—hemy door. One day he came
to see me, knocked at my
door, but I did not open it.
You see, I had the painter,
Callides, in my room;
Callides had given me ten
drachmas. Demophantos
swore and beat his fists on
the door and left cursing
me. Several days passed
without my sending for
him; Callides was still in
my house. Thereupon
Demophantos, who was
already quite excited, went
wild. He broke open my
door, wept, pulled me
about, threatened to kill
me, tore my tunic, and did
everything, in fact, that a
jealous man would do, and
finally presented me with
six thousand drachmas. In
consideration of this sum, I
was his for a period of
eight months. His wife
used to say that I had
bewitched him with some
powder. That bewitching
powder, to be sure, was
jealousy. That is why,
Chrysis, I advise you to act
likewise with Corgi as.
—LUCIAN, DIALOGUES OF THE
COURTESANS, TRANSLATED BY
A.L.H.
"A wife is someone on
whom one gazes all one's
life; yet it is just as well if
she be not beautiful''—so
spake Jinta of the Gion.
I'll is may be the flippant
saying of a go-between, but
it is not to be dismissed too
lightly. . . . Besides, it is
with beautiful women as
with beautiful views: if one
is forever looking at them,
one soon tires of their
charm. This I can judge
from my own experience.
One year I went to
Matsushima, and, though
at first I was moved by the
beauty of the place and
clapped my hands with
