The Anti-Seducer • 139
For two months Meilcour trembled in de Lursay's presence. He was
afraid of her, and did not know what to do. One evening they were dis-
cussing a recent play. How well one character had declared his love to a
woman, Madame remarked. Noting Meilcour's obvious discomfort, she
went on, "If I am not mistaken, a declaration can only seem such an em-
barrassing matter because you yourself have one to make." Madame de
Lursay knew full well that she was the source of the young man's awkward-
ness, but she was a tease; you must tell me, she said, with whom you are in
love. Finally Meilcour confessed: it was indeed Madame whom he desired.
His mother's friend advised him to not think of her that way, but she also
sighed, and gave him a long and languid look. Her words said one thing,
her eyes another—perhaps she was not as untouchable as he had thought.
As the evening ended, though, Madame de Lursay said she doubted his
feelings would last, and she left young Meilcour troubled that she had said
nothing about reciprocating his love.
Over the next few days, Meilcour repeatedly asked de Lursay to declare
her love for him, and she repeatedly refused. Eventually the young man de-
cided his cause was hopeless, and gave up; but a few nights later, at a soiree
at her house, her dress seemed more enticing than usual, and her looks at
him stirred his blood. He returned them, and followed her around, while
she took care to keep a bit of distance, lest others sense what was happen-
ing. Yet she also managed to arrange that he could stay without arousing
suspicion when the other visitors left.
When they were finally alone, she made him sit beside her on the sofa.
He could barely speak; the silence was uncomfortable. To get him talking
she raised the same old subject: his youth would make his love for her a
passing fancy. Instead of denying it he looked dejected, and continued to
keep a polite distance, so that she finally exclaimed, with obvious irony, "If
it were known that you were here with my consent, that I had voluntarily
arranged it with you . . . what might not people say? And yet how wrong
they would be, for no one could be more respectful than you are." Goaded
into action, Meilcour grabbed her hand and looked her in the eye. She
blushed and told him he should go, but the way she arranged herself on the
sofa and looked back at him suggested he should do the opposite. Yet Meil-
cour still hesitated: she had told him to go, and if he disobeyed she might
cause a scene, and might never forgive him; he would have made a fool of
himself, and everyone, including his mother, would hear of it. He soon got
up, apologizing for his momentary boldness. Her astonished and somewhat
cold look meant he had indeed gone too far, he imagined, and he said
goodbye and left.
Meilcour and Madame de Lursay appear in the novel The Wayward Head
and Heart, written in 1738 by Crébillon fils, who based his characters on
libertines he knew in the France of the time. For Crébillon fils, seduction is
all about signs—about being able to send them and read them. This is notNow one of the twain was
a bold man, and well
knowing how the party
had been made for
something else than merely
to walk and take the air,
and judging by his lady's
face, which he saw to be all
a-fire, that she had
longings to taste other fare
than the muscatels that
hung on the trellis, as also
by her hot, wanton, and
wild speech, he did
promptly seize on so fair
an opportunity. So catching
hold of her without the
least ceremony, he did lay
her on a little couch that
was there made of turf and
clods of earth, and did very
pleasantly work his will of
her, without her ever
uttering a word but only:
"Heavens! Sir, what are
you at? Surely you be the
maddest and strangest
fellow ever was! If anyone
comes, whatever will they
say? Great heavens! get
out!" But the gentleman,
without disturbing himself,
did so well continue what
he had begun that he did
finish, and she to boot,
with such content as that
after taking three or four
turns up and down the
alley, they did presently
start afresh. Anon, coming
forth into another, open,
alley, they did see in
another part of the garden
the other pair, who were
walking about together just
as they had left them at
first. Whereupon the lady,
well content, did say to the
gentleman in the like
condition, "I verily believe
so and so hath played the
silly prude, and hath given
his lady no other
entertainment but only
words, fine speeches, and
promenading." • Afterward
when all four were come
together, the two ladies did
fall to asking one another
140 • The Art of Seduction
because sexuality is repressed and requires speaking in code. It is rather be-
cause wordless communication (through clothes, gestures, actions) is the
most pleasurable, exciting, and seductive form of language.
In Crébillon fils's novel, Madame de Lursay is an ingenious seductress
who finds it exciting to initiate young men. But even she cannot overcome
the youthful stupidity of Meilcour, who is incapable of reading her signs
because he is absorbed in his own thoughts. Later in the story, she does
manage to educate him, but in real life there are many who cannot be
educated. They are too literal and insensitive to the details that contain
seductive power. They do not so much repel as irritate and infuriate you
by their constant misinterpretations, always viewing life from behind
the screen of their ego and unable to see things as they really are. Meilcour
is so caught up in himself he cannot see that Madame is expecting him to
make the bold move to which she will have to succumb. His hesitation
shows that he is thinking of himself, not of her; that he is worrying about
how he will look, not feeling overwhelmed by her charms. Nothing could
be more anti-seductive. Recognize such types, and if they are past the
young age that would give them an excuse, do not entangle yourself in
their awkwardness—they will infect you with doubt.
4. In the Heian court of late-tenth-century Japan, the young nobleman
Kaoru, purported son of the great seducer Genji himself, had had nothing
but misfortune in love. He had become infatuated with a young princess,
Oigimi, who lived in a dilapidated home in the countryside, her father
having fallen on hard times. Then one day he had an encounter with
Oigimi's sister, Nakanokimi, that convinced him she was the one he actu-
ally loved. Confused, he returned to court, and did not visit the sisters for
some time. Then their father died, followed shortly thereafter by Oigimi
herself.
Now Kaoru realized his mistake: he had loved Oigimi all along, and she
had died out of despair that he did not care for her. He would never meet
her like again; she was all he could think about. When Nakanokimi, her fa-
ther and sister dead, came to live at court, Kaoru had the house where
Oigimi and her family had lived turned into a shrine.
One day, Nakanokimi, seeing the melancholy into which Kaoru had
fallen, told him that there was a third sister, Ukifune, who resembled his
beloved Oigimi and lived hidden away in the countryside. Kaoru came to
life—perhaps he had a chance to redeem himself, to change the past. But
how could he meet this woman? There came a time when he visited the
shrine to pay his respects to the departed Oigimi, and heard that the myste-
rious Ukifune was there as well. Agitated and excited, he managed to catch
a glimpse of her through the crack in a door. The sight of her took his
breath away: although she was a plain-looking country girl, in Kaoru's eyes
she was the living incarnation of Oigimi. Her voice, meanwhile, was likehow it had fared with each.
Then the one which was
well content did reply she
was exceeding well, indeed
she was; indeed for the
nonce she could scarce be
better. The other, which
was ill content, did declare
for her part she had had to
do with the biggest fool and
most coward lover she had
ever seen; and all the time
the two gentlemen could
see them laughing together
as they walked and crying
out: "Oh! the silly fool!
the shamefaced poltroon
and coward!" At this the
successful gallant said to his
companion: "Hark to our
ladies, which do cry out at
you, and mock you sore.
You will find you have
overplayed the prude and
coxcomb this bout." So
much he did allow; but
there was no more time to
remedy his error, for
opportunity gave him
no other handle to seize
her by.
—SEIGNEUR DE BRANTÔME,
LIVES OF FAIR & GALLANT
LADIES, TRANSLATED BY A. R..
ALLINSON
