Charisma and Seduction
Charisma is seduction on a mass level. Charismatics make crowds of
people fall in love with them, then lead them along. The process of
making them fall in love is simple and follows a path similar to that of a
one-on-one seduction. Charismatics have certain qualities that are power-
fully attractive and that make them stand out. This could be their self-
belief, their boldness, their serenity. They keep the source of these qualities
mysterious. They do not explain where their confidence or contentment
comes from, but it can be felt by everyone; it radiates outward, without the
appearance of conscious effort. The face of the Charismatic is usually ani-
mated, full of energy, desire, alertness—the look of a lover, one that is in-
stantly appealing, even vaguely sexual. We happily follow Charismatics
because we like to be led, particularly by people who promise adventure or
prosperity. We lose ourselves in their cause, become emotionally attached
to them, feel more alive by believing in them—we fall in love. Charisma
plays on repressed sexuality, creates an erotic charge. Yet the origins of the
word lie not in sexuality but in religion, and religion remains deeply em-
bedded in modern charisma.
Thousands of years ago, people believed in gods and spirits, but few
could ever say that they had witnessed a miracle, a physical demonstration
of divine power. A man, however, who seemed possessed by a divine
spirit—speaking in tongues, ecstatic raptures, the expression of intense
visions—would stand out as one whom the gods had singled out. And this
man, a priest or a prophet, gained great power over others. What made the
Hebrews believe in Moses, follow him out of Egypt, and remain loyal to
him despite their endless wandering in the desert? The look in his eye, his
inspired and inspiring words, the face that literally glowed when he came
down from Mount Sinai—all these things gave him the appearance of hav-
ing direct communication with God, and were the source of his authority.
And these were what was meant by "charisma," a Greek word referring to
prophets and to Christ himself. In early Christianity, charisma was a gift or
talent vouchsafed by God's grace and revealing His presence. Most of the
great religions were founded by a Charismatic, a person who physically dis-
played the signs of God's favor.
Over the years, the world became more rational. Eventually people
came to hold power not by divine right but because they won votes, or
proved their competence. The great early-twentieth-century German soci-"Charisma" shall be
understood to refer to an
extraordinary quality of a
person, regardless of
whether this quality is
actual, alleged or
presumed. "Charismatic
authority," hence, shall
refer to a rule over men,
whether predominately
ex tern al or p redominately
internal, to which the
governed submit because of
their belief in the
extraordinary quality of the
specific person.
—MAX WEBER, FROM MAX
WEBER: ESSAYS IN SOCIOLOGY,
EDITED BY HANS GERTH AND
C. WRIGHT MILLS
97
98 • The Art of Seduction
ologist Max Weber, however, noticed that despite our supposed progress,
there were more Charismatics than ever. What characterized a modern
Charismatic, according to Weber, was the appearance of an extraordinary
quality in their character, the equivalent of a sign of God's favor. How else
to explain the power of a Robespierre or a Lenin? More than anything it
was the force of their magnetic personalities that made these men stand out
and was the source of their power. They did not speak of God but of a
great cause, visions of a future society. Their appeal was emotional; they
seemed possessed. And their audiences reacted as euphorically as earlier au-
diences had to a prophet. When Lenin died, in 1924, a cult formed around
his memory, transforming the communist leader into a deity.
Today, anyone who has presence, who attracts attention when he or she
enters a room, is said to possess charisma. But even these less-exalted types
reveal a trace of the quality suggested by the word's original meaning.
Their charisma is mysterious and inexplicable, never obvious. They have an
unusual confidence. They have a gift—often a smoothness with language—
that makes them stand out from the crowd. They express a vision. We may
not realize it, but in their presence we have a kind of religious experience:
we believe in these people, without having any rational evidence for doing
so. When trying to concoct an effect of charisma, never forget the religious
source of its power. You must radiate an inward quality that has a saintly or
spiritual edge to it. Your eyes must glow with the fire of a prophet. Your
charisma must seem natural, as if it came from something mysteriously be-
yond your control, a gift of the gods. In our rational, disenchanted world,
people crave a religious experience, particularly on a group level. Any sign
of charisma plays to this desire to believe in something. And there is noth-
ing more seductive than giving people something to believe in and follow.
Charisma must seem mystical, but that does not mean you cannot learn
certain tricks that will enhance the charisma you already possess, or will
give you the outward appearance of it. The following are basic qualities
that will help create the illusion of charisma:
Purpose. If people believe you have a plan, that you know where you are
going, they will follow you instinctively. The direction does not matter:
pick a cause, an ideal, a vision and show that you will not sway from your
goal. People will imagine that your confidence comes from something
real—just as the ancient Hebrews believed Moses was in communion with
God, simply because he showed the outward signs.
Purposefulness is doubly charismatic in times of trouble. Since most
people hesitate before taking bold action (even when action is what is re-
quired), single-minded self-assurance will make you the focus of attention.
People will believe in you through the simple force of your character. When
Franklin Delano Roosevelt came to power amidst the Depression, much of
the public had little faith he could turn things around. But in his first few
months in office he displayed such confidence, such decisiveness and clarityAnd the Lord said to
Moses, "Write these
words; in accordance with
these words I have made a
covenant with you and
with Israel." And he was
there with the Lord forty
days and forty nights; he
neither ate bread nor drank
water. And he wrote upon
the tables the words of the
covenant, the ten
commandments. When
Moses came down from
Mount Sinai, with the two
tables of the testimony in
his hand as he came down
from the mountain, Moses
did not know that the skin
of his face shone because he
had been talking with
God. And when Aaron
and all the people of Israel
saw Moses, behold, the
skin of his face shone, and
they were afraid to come
near him. But Moses
called to them; and Aaron
and all the leaders of the
congregation returned to
him, and Moses talked
with them. And afterward
all the people of Israel came
near, and he gave them in
commandment all that the
Lord had spoken with him
in Mount Sinai. And
when Moses had finished
speaking with them, he put
a veil on his face; but
whenever Moses went in
before the Lord to speak
with him, he took the veil
off, until he came out; and
when he came out, and
told the people of Israel
what he was commanded,
the people of Israel saw the
face of Moses, that the skin
of Moses's face shone; and
Moses would put the veil
upon his face again, until
he went in to speak
with him.
—EXODUS 34:27 OLD
TESTAMENT
