238 • The Art of Seduction
Reversal
The reverse of temptation is security or satisfaction, and both are fatal to
seduction. If you cannot tempt someone out of their habitual com-
fort, you cannot seduce them. If you satisfy the desire you have awakened,
the seduction is over. There is no reversal to temptation. Although some
stages can be passed over, no seduction can proceed without some form of
temptation, so it is always better to plan it carefully, tailoring it to the weak-
ness and childishness in your particular target.
Phase Two
Lead Astray—
Creating Pleasure and Confusion
Your victims are sufficiently intrigued and their desire for you is
growing, but their attachment is weak and at any moment they could
decide to turn back. The goal in this phase is to lead your victims so
far astray—keeping them emotional and confused, giving them plea-
sure but making them want more—that retreat is no longer possible.
Springing on them a pleasant surprise will make them see you as de-
lightfully unpredictable, but will also keep them off balance (9: Keep
them in suspense—what comes next?). The artful use of soft and
pleasant words will intoxicate them and stimulate fantasies (10: Use
the demonic power of words to sow confusion). Aesthetic touches and
pleasant little rituals will titillate their senses, distract their minds
(11: Pay attention to detail).
Your greatest danger in this phase is the mere hint of routine or famil-
iarity. You need to maintain some mystery, to keep a little distance so
that in your absence your victims become obsessed with you (12: Poeti-
cize your presence). They may realize they are falling for you, but
they must never suspect how much of this has come from your manipu-
lations. A well-timed display of your weakness, of how emotional you
have become under their influence will help cover your tracks (13: Dis-
arm through strategic weakness and vulnerability). To excite your vic-
tims and make them highly emotional, you must give them the feeling
that they are actually living some of the fantasies you have stirred in
their imagination (14: Confuse desire and reality). By giving them
only a part of the fantasy, you will keep them coming back for more.
Focusing your attention on them so that the rest of the world fades
away, even taking them on a trip, will lead them far astray (15: Isolate
your victim). There is no turning back.
