214 • The Art of Seduction
his lover: "Is she making you quite happy? Oh, I fear the contrary, and this
distresses me. . . . Are you not often the victim of her strange whims?" To
the young man's surprise, Madame began to talk of the countess in a way
that made it seem that she had been unfaithful to him (which was some-
thing he had suspected). Madame sighed—she regretted saying such things
about her friend, and asked him to forgive her; then, as if a new thought
had occurred to her, she mentioned a nearby pavilion, a delightful place,
full of pleasant memories. But the shame of it was, it was locked and she
had no key. And yet they found their way to the pavilion, and lo and be-
hold, the door had been left open. It was dark inside, but the young man
could sense that it was a place for trysts. They entered and sank onto a sofa,
and before he knew what had come over him, he took her in his arms.
Madame seemed to push him away, but then gave in. Finally she came to
her senses: they must return to the house. Had he gone too far? He must
try to control himself.
As they strolled back to the house, Madame remarked, "What a deli-
cious night we've just spent." Was she referring to what had happened in
the pavilion? "There is an even more charming room in the château," she
went on, "but I can't show you anything," implying he had been too for-
ward. She had mentioned this room ("Monsieur's apartment") several times
before; he could not imagine what could be so interesting about it, but by
now he was dying to see it and insisted she show it to him. "If you promise
to be good," she replied, her eyes widening. Through the darkness of the
house she led him into the room, which, to his delight, was a kind of tem-
ple of pleasure: there were mirrors on the walls, trompe l'oeil paintings
evoking a forest scene, even a dark grotto, and a garlanded statue of Eros.
Overwhelmed by the mood of the place, the young man quickly resumed
what he had started in the pavilion, and would have lost all track of time
if a servant had not rushed in and warned them that it was getting light
outside—Monsieur would soon be up.
They quickly separated. Later that day, as the young man prepared to
leave, his hostess said, "Goodbye, Monsieur; I owe you so many pleasures;
but I have paid you with a beautiful dream. Now your love summons you
to return. . . . Don't give the Countess cause to quarrel with me." Reflect-
ing on his experience on the way back, he could not figure out what it
meant. He had the vague sensation of having been used, but the pleasures
he remembered outweighed his doubts.
Interpretation. Madame de T is a character in the eighteenth-century
libertine short story "No Tomorrow," by Vivant Denon. The young man is
the story's narrator. Although fictional, Madame's techniques were clearly
based on those of several well-known libertines of the time, masters of
the game of seduction. And the most dangerous of their weapons was
insinuation—the means by which Madame cast her spell on the young man,
making him seem the aggressor, giving her the night of pleasure she desired,A few short years ago, in
our native city, where fraud
and cunning prosper more
than love or loyalty, there
was a noblewoman of
striking beauty and
impeccable breeding, who
was endowed by Nature
with as lofty a
temperament and shrewd
an intellect as could be
found in any other woman
of her time. . . . • This
lady, being of gentle birth
and finding herself married
off to a master woollen-
draper because he happened
to be very rich, was unable
to stifle her heartfelt
contempt, for she was
firmly of the opinion that
no man of low condition,
however wealthy, was
deserving of a noble wife.
And on discovering that all
he was capable of despite
his massive wealth, was
distinguishing wool from
cotton, supervising the
setting up of a loom, or
debating the virtues of a
particular yarn with a
spinner-woman, she
resolved that as far as it lay
within her power she
would have nothing
whatsoever to do with his
beastly caresses. Moreover
she was determined to seek
her pleasure elsewhere, in
the company of one who
seemed more worthy of her
affection, and so it was that
she fell deeply in love with
an extremely eligible man
in his middle thirties. And
whenever a day passed
without her having set eyes
upon him, she was restless
for the whole of the
following night. •
However, the gentleman
suspected nothing of all
this, and took no notice of
her; and for her part, being
very cautious, she would
not venture to declare her
love by dispatching a
maidservant or writing him
Master the Art of Insinuation • 215
and safeguarding her guiltless reputation, all in one stroke. After all, he was
the one who initiated physical contact, or so it seemed. In truth, she was the
one in control, planting precisely the ideas in his mind that she wanted. That
first physical encounter in the carriage, for instance, that she had set up by
inviting him closer: she later rebuked him for being forward, but what lin-
gered in his mind was the excitement of the moment. Her talk of the
countess made him confused and guilty; but then she hinted that his lover
was unfaithful, planting a different seed in his mind: anger, and the desire for
revenge. Then she asked him to forget what she had said and forgive her
for saying it, a key insinuating tactic: "I am asking you to forget what I have
said, but I know you cannot; the thought will remain in your mind." Pro-
voked this way, it was inevitable he would grab her in the pavilion. She sev-
eral times mentioned the room in the château—of course he insisted on
going there. She enveloped the evening in an air of ambiguity. Even her
words "If you promise to be good" could be read several ways. The young
man's head and heart were inflamed with all of the feelings—discontent,
confusion, desire—that she had indirectly instilled in him.
Particularly in the early phases of a seduction, learn to make everything
you say and do a kind of insinuation. Insinuate doubt with a comment here
and there about other people in the victim's life, making the victim feel
vulnerable. Slight physical contact insinuates desire, as does a fleeting but
memorable look, or an unusually warm tone of voice, both for the briefest
of moments. A passing comment suggests that something about the victim
interests you; but keep it subtle, your words revealing a possibility, creating a
doubt. You are planting seeds that will take root in the weeks to come.
When you are not there, your targets will fantasize about the ideas you have
stirred up, and brood upon the doubts. They are slowly being led into your
web, unaware that you are in control. How can they resist or become de-
fensive if they cannot even see what is happening?
What distinguishes a suggestion from other kinds of psy-
chical influence, such as a command or the giving of a piece
of information or instruction, is that in the case of a sug-
gestion an idea is aroused in another person's brain which
is not examined in regard to its origin but is accepted just
as though it had arisen spontaneously in that brain.
—SIGMUND FREUD
Keys to Seduction
You cannot pass through life without in one way or another trying to
persuade people of something. Take the direct route, saying exactly
what you want, and your honesty may make you feel good but you are
probably not getting anywhere. People have their own sets of ideas, which
are hardened into stone by habit; your words, entering their minds, com-a letter, for fear of the
dangers that this might
entail. But having
perceived that he was on
very friendly terms with a
certain priest, a rotund,
uncouth, individual who
was nevertheless regarded
as an outstandingly able
friar on account of his very
saintly way of life, she
calculated that this fellow
would serve as an ideal go-
between for her and the
man she loved. And so,
after reflecting on the
strategy she would adopt,
she paid a visit, at an
appropriate hour of the
day, to the church where he
was to be found, and
having sought him out, she
asked him whether he
would agree to confess her.
• Since he could tell at a
glance that she was a lady
of quality, the friar gladly
heard her confession, and
when she had got to the
end of it, she continued as
follows: • "Father, as I
shall explain to you
presently, there is a certain
matter about which I am
compelled to seek your
advice and assistance.
Having already told you
my name, I feel sure you
will know my family and
my husband. He loves me
more dearly than life itself,
and since he is enormously
rich, he never has the
slightest difficulty or
hesitation in supplying me
with every single object for
which I display a yearning.
Consequently, my love for
him is quite unbounded,
and if my mere thoughts,
to say nothing of my actual
behavior, were to run
contrary to his wishes and
his honor, I would be more
deserving of hellfire than
the wickedest woman who
ever lived. • "Now, there is
a certain person, of
respectable outward
