Enter Their Spirit • 225
philosophical keenness, and charm him by seeming to share his interest in
politics and warfare. Many men first formed deep friendships with her,
only to later fall madly in love. The masculine in a woman is as soothing to
men as the feminine in a man is to women. To a man, a woman's strange-
ness can create frustration and even hostility. He may be lured into a sexual
encounter, but a longer-lasting spell cannot be created without an accom-
panying mental seduction. The key is to enter his spirit. Men are often
seduced by the masculine element in a woman's behavior or character.
In the novel Clarissa (1748) by Samuel Richardson, the young and de-
vout Clarissa Harlowe is being courted by the notorious rake Lovelace.
Clarissa knows Lovelace's reputation, but for the most part he has not acted
as she would expect: he is polite, seems a little sad and confused. At one
point she finds out that he has done a most noble and charitable deed to a
family in distress, giving the father money, helping the man's daughter get
married, giving them wholesome advice. At last Lovelace confesses to
Clarissa what she has suspected: he wants to repent, to change his ways. His
letters to her are emotional, almost religious in their passion. Perhaps she
will be the one to lead him to righteousness? But of course Lovelace has
trapped her: he is using the seducer's tactic of mirroring her tastes, in this
case her spirituality. Once she lets her guard down, once she believes she
can reform him, she is doomed: now he can slowly insinuate his own spirit
into his letters and encounters with her. Remember: the operative word is
"spirit," and that is often exactly where to take aim. By seeming to mirror
someone's spiritual values you can seem to establish a deep-rooted harmony
between the two of you, which can then be transferred to the physical
plane.
When Josephine Baker moved to Paris, in 1925, as part of an all-black
revue, her exoticism made her an overnight sensation. But the French are
notoriously fickle, and Baker sensed that their interest in her would quickly
pass to someone else. To seduce them for good, she entered their spirit. She
learned French and began to sing in it. She started dressing and acting as a
stylish French lady, as if to say that she preferred the French way of life to
the American. Countries are like people: they have vast insecurities, and
they feel threatened by other customs. It is often quite seductive to a people
to see an outsider adopting their ways. Benjamin Disraeli was born and
lived all his life in England, but he was Jewish by birth, and had exotic fea-
tures; the provincial English considered him an outsider. Yet he was more
English in his manners and tastes than many an Englishman, and this was
part of his charm, which he proved by becoming the leader of the Conser-
vative Party. Should you be an outsider (as most of us ultimately are), turn
it to advantage: play on your alien nature in such a way as to show the
group how deeply you prefer their tastes and customs to your own.
In 1752, the notorious rake Saltykov determined to be the first man in
the Russian court to seduce the twenty-three-year-old grand duchess, the
future Empress Catherine the Great. He knew that she was lonely; her hus-
band Peter ignored her, as did many of the other courtiers. And yet the ob-for a crust of barley bread.
• "Have you ever tasted
anything more delicious,"
went on the old man,
"than the spices in these
dishes?" • "Never,
indeed," replied
Shakashik. • "Eat
heartily, then," said his
host, "and do not be
ashamed!" • "I thank
you, sir," answered
Shakashik, "but I have
already eaten my fill. " •
Presently, however, the old
man clapped his hands
again and cried: "Bring in
the wine!" • . . . "Sir,"
said Shakashik, "your
generosity overwhelms
me!" He lifted the invisible
cup to his lips, and made
as if to drain it at one gulp.
• "Health and joy to
you!" exclaimed the old
man, as he pretended to
pour himself some wine
and drink it off. He
handed another cup to his
guest, and they both
continued to act in this
fashion until Shakashik,
feigning himself drunk,
began to roll his head from
side to side. Then, taking
his bounteous host
unawares, he suddenly
raised his arm so high that
the white of his armpit
could be seen, and dealt
him a blow on the neck
which made the hall echo
with the sound. And this
he followed by a second
blow. • The old man rose
in anger and cried: "What
are you doing, vile
creature?" • "Sir" replied
my brother, "you have
received your humble slave
into your house and loaded
him with your generosity;
you have fed him with the
choicest food and quenched
his thirst with the most
potent wines. Alas, he
became drunk, and forgot
his manners! But you are
so noble, sir, that you will
226 • The Art of Seduction
stacles were immense: she was spied on day and night. Still, Saltykov man-
aged to befriend the young woman, and to enter her all-too-small circle.
He finally got her alone, and made it clear to her how well he understood
her loneliness, how deeply he disliked her husband, and how much he
shared her interest in the new ideas that were sweeping Europe. Soon he
found himself able to arrange further meetings, where he gave her the im-
pression that when he was with her, nothing else in the world mattered.
Catherine fell deeply in love with him, and he did in fact become her first
lover. Saltykov had entered her spirit.
When you mirror people, you focus intense attention on them. They
will sense the effort you are making, and will find it flattering. Obviously
you have chosen them, separating them out from the rest. There seems to
be nothing else in your life but them—their moods, their tastes, their spirit.
The more you focus on them, the deeper the spell you produce, and the in-
toxicating effect you have on their vanity.
Many of us have difficulty reconciling the person we are right now
with the person we want to be. We are disappointed that we have compro-
mised our youthful ideals, and we still imagine ourselves as that person
who had so much promise, but whom circumstances prevented from real-
izing it. When you are mirroring someone, do not stop at the person they
have become; enter the spirit of that ideal person they wanted to be. This
is how the French writer Chateaubriand managed to become a great se-
ducer, despite his physical ugliness. When he was growing up, in the latter
eighteenth century, romanticism was coming into fashion, and many
young women felt deeply oppressed by the lack of romance in their lives.
Chateaubriand would reawaken the fantasy they had had as young girls of
being swept off their feet, of fulfilling romantic ideals. This form of enter-
ing another's spirit is perhaps the most effective kind, because it makes peo-
ple feel better about themselves. In your presence, they live the life of the
person they had wanted to be—a great lover, a romantic hero, whatever it
is. Discover those crushed ideals and mirror them, bringing them back to
life by reflecting them back to your target. Few can resist such a lure.
Symbol: The
Hunter's Mirror. The lark is a sa-
vory bird, but difficult to catch. In the field, the
hunter places a mirror on a stand. The lark lands in
front of the glass, steps back and forth, entranced by its own
moving image and by the imitative mating dance it sees per-
formed before its eyes. Hypnotized, the bird loses all sense of its
surroundings, until the hunter's net traps it against the mirror.surely pardon his offence. "
• When he heard these
words, the old man burst
out laughing and said:
"For a long time I have
jested with all types of
men, but no one has ever
had the patience or the wit
to enter into my humors as
you have done. Now,
therefore, I pardon you,
and ask you in truth to cat
and drink with me, and to
he my companion as long
as I live. " • Then the old
man ordered his attendants
to serve all the dishes
which they had consumed
in fancy, and when he and
my brother had eaten their
fill they repaired to the
drinking chamber, where
beautiful young women
sang and made music. The
old Barmecide gave
Shakashik a robe of honor
and made him his constant
companion.
—"THE TALE OF SHAKASHIK,
THE BARBER'S SIXTH BROTHER,"
TALES FROM THE THOUSAND
AND ONE NIGHTS, TRANSLATED
BY N.J. DAWOOD
