418 • The Art of Seduction
return to inflicting pain and pulling back. Never rely on your physical
charms; even beauty loses its appeal with repeated exposure. Only strategy
and effort will fight off inertia.
Maintain mystery. Familiarity is the death of seduction. If the target
knows everything about you, the relationship gains a level of comfort but
loses the elements of fantasy and anxiety. Without anxiety and a touch of
fear, the erotic tension is dissolved. Remember: reality is not seductive.
Keep some dark corners in your character, flout expectations, use absences
to fragment the clinging, possessive pull that allows familiarity to creep in.
Maintain some mystery or be taken for granted. You will have only yourself
to blame for what follows.
Maintain lightness. Seduction is a game, not a matter of life and death.
There will be a tendency in the "post" phase to take things more seriously
and personally, and to whine about behavior that does not please you. Fight
this as much as possible, for it will create exactly the effect you do not want.
You cannot control the other person by nagging and complaining; it will
make them defensive, exacerbating the problem. You will have more con-
trol if you maintain the proper spirit. Your playfulness, the little ruses you
employ to please and delight them, your indulgence of their faults, will
make your victims compliant and easy to handle. Never try to change your
victims; instead, induce them to follow your lead.
Avoid the slow burnout. Often, one person becomes disenchanted but
lacks the courage to make the break. Instead, he or she withdraws inside. As
an absence, this psychological step back may inadvertently reignite the
other person's desire, and a frustrating cycle begins of pursuit and retreat.
Everything unravels, slowly. Once you feel disenchanted and know it is
over, end it quickly, without apology. That would only insult the other per-
son. A quick separation is often easier to get over—it is as if you had a
problem being faithful, as opposed to your feeling that the seduced was no
longer being desirable. Once you are truly disenchanted, there is no going
back, so don't hang on out of false pity. It is more compassionate to make a
clean break. If that seems inappropriate or too ugly, then deliberately disen-
chant the victim with anti-seductive behavior.
Examples of Sacrifice and Integration
1. In the 1770s, the handsome Chevalier de Belleroche began an affair
with an older woman, the Marquise de Merteuil. He saw a lot of her, but
soon she began to pick quarrels with him. Entranced by her unpredictableAge cannot wither her, nor
custom stale \ Her infinite
variety: other women cloy \
The appetites they feed;
but she makes hungry \
Where most she satisfies.
—WILLIAM SHAKESPEARE,
ANTONY AND CLEOPATRA
Cry hurrah, and hurrah
again, for a splendid
triumph— \ The quarry I
sought has fallen into my
toils. . . . \ Why hurry,
young man? Your ship's
still in mid-passage, \ And
the harbor I seek is far
away \ Through my verses,
it's true, you may have
acquired a mistress, \ But
that's not enough. If my
art \ Caught her, my art
must keep her. To guard a
conquest's \As tricky as
making it. There was luck
in the chase, \ But this task
will call for skill. If ever I
needed support from \
Venus and Son, and
Erato—the Muse \ Erotic
by name—it's now, for my
too-ambitious project \ To
relate some techniques that
might restrain \ That fickle
young globetrotter,
Love. . . . \ To be loved
you must show yourself
lovable— \ Something
good looks alone \ Can
never achieve. You may be
handsome as Homer's
Nireus, \ Or young Hylas,
snatched by those bad \
Naiads; but all the same,
to avoid a surprise
desertion \And keep your
girl, it's best you have gifts
of mind \ In addition to
physical charms. Beauty's
fragile, the passing \ Years
diminish its substance, eat
it away. \ Violets and
bell-mouthed lilies do not
bloom for ever, \ Hard
thorns are all that's left of
the blown rose. \ So with
you, my handsome youth:
Beware the Aftereffects • 419
moods, he worked hard to please her, showering her with attention and
tenderness. Eventually the quarreling stopped, and as the days went by, de
Belleroche felt confident that Merteuil loved him—until one day, when he
came to visit, and found that she was not at home. Her footman greeted
him at the door, and said he would take the chevalier to a secret house of
Merteuil's outside Paris. There the marquise was waiting for him, in a re-
newed mood of coquettishness: she acted as if this were their first tryst.
The chevalier had never seen her so ardent. He left at daybreak more in
love than ever, but a few days later they quarreled again. The marquise
seemed cold after that, and he saw her flirt with another man at a party.
He felt horribly jealous, but as before, his solution was to become more
attentive and loving. This, he thought, was the way to appease a difficult
woman.
Now Merteuil had to spend a few weeks at her country home to han-
dle some business there. She invited de Belleroche to join her for an ex-
tended stay, and he happily agreed, remembering the new life an earlier stay
there had brought to their affair. Once again she surprised him: her affec-
tion and desire to please him were rejuvenated. This time, though, he did
not have to leave the next morning. Days went by, and she refused to enter-
tain any guests. The world would not intrude on them. And this time there
was no coldness or quarreling, only good cheer and love. Yet now de Belle-
roche began to grow a little tired of the marquise. He thought of Paris and
the balls he was missing; a week later he cut short his stay on some business
pretext and hurried back to the city. Somehow the marquise did not seem
so charming anymore.
Interpretation. The Marquise de Merteuil, a character in Choderlos de La-
clos's novel Dangerous Liaisons, is a practiced seductress who never lets her
affairs drag on too long. De Belleroche is young and handsome but that is
all. As her interest in him wanes, she decides to bring him to the secret
house to try to inject some novelty into the affair. This works for a while,
but it isn't enough. The chevalier must be gotten rid of. She tries coldness,
anger (hoping to start a fight), even a show of interest in another man. All
this only intensifies his attachment. She can't just leave him—he might be-
come vengeful, or try even harder to win her back. The solution: she delib-
erately breaks the spell by overwhelming him with attention. Abandoning
the pattern of alternating warmth with coldness, she acts hopelessly in love.
Alone with her day after day, with no space to fantasize, he no longer sees
her as enchanting and breaks off the affair. This was her goal all along.
If a break with the victim is too messy or difficult (or you lack the
nerve), then do the next best thing: deliberately break the spell that ties him
or her to you. Aloofness or anger will only stir the other person s insecurity,
producing a clinging horror. Instead, try suffocating them with love and at-
tention: be clinging and possessive yourself, moon over the lover's every ac-
tion and character trait, create the sense that this monotonous affection willsoon wrinkles will furrow \
Your body; soon, too soon,
your hair turn gray. \ Then
build an enduring mind,
add that to your beauty: \
It alone will last till the
flames \ Consume you.
Keep your wits sharp,
explore the liberal \Arts,
win mastery over Greek \
As well as Latin. Ulysses
was eloquent, not
handsome— \ Yet he filled
sea-goddesses' hearts \
With aching passion. . . .
\ Nothing works on a
mood like tactful tolerance:
harshness \ Provokes
hatred, makes nasty rows. \
We detest the hawk and
the wolf, those natural
hunters, \ Always preying
on timid flocks; \ But the
gentle swallow goes safe
from man's snares, we
fashion \ Little turreted
houses for doves. \ Keep
clear of all quarrels, sharp-
tongued recriminations— \
Love's sensitive, needs to
be fed \ With gentle words.
Leave nagging to wives
and husbands, \ Let them,
if they want, think it a
natural law, \ A permanent
state of feud. Wives thrive
on wrangling, \ That's their
dowry. A mistress should
always hear \ What she
wants to be told. . . . \
Use tender blandishments,
language that caresses \
The ear, make her glad
you came.
—OVID, THE ART OF LOVE,
TRANSLATED BY PETER GREEN
In Paris the band played a
concert at the Palais
Chaleux. They played the
first half, and then there
was an hour interval—
intermission, we call it—
during which there was a
fabulous buffet on a great
long table laden with
delicious foods and cognac,
