Pay Attention to Detail • 269
ern powers, which had been threatening invasion if the emperor had been
killed. The goal of the seduction was simple: dazzle the wives with color,
spectacle, theater. The empress applied all her expertise to the task, and she
was a genius for detail. She had designed the spectacles in a rising order—
the uniformed eunuchs first, then the Manchu ladies in their headdresses,
and finally the empress herself. It was pure theater, and it was overwhelm-
ing. Then the empress brought the spectacle down a notch, humanizing it
with gifts, warm greetings, the reassuring presence of the emperor, teas,
and entertainments, which were in no way inferior to anything in the West.
She ended the banquet on another high note—the little drama with the
sharing of the teacups, followed by even more magnificent gifts. The
women's heads were spinning when they left. In truth they had never seen
such exotic splendor—and they never understood how carefully its details
had been orchestrated by the empress. Charmed by the spectacle, they trans-
ferred their happy feelings to the empress and gave her their approval—all
that she required.
The key to distracting people (seduction is distraction) is to fill their
eyes and ears with details, little rituals, colorful objects. Detail is what
makes things seem real and substantial. A thoughtful gift won't seem to
have an ulterior motive. A ritual full of charming little actions is so enjoy-
able to watch. Jewelry, handsome furnishings, touches of color in clothing,
dazzle the eye. It is a childish weakness of ours: we prefer to focus on the
pleasant little details rather than on the larger picture. The more senses you
appeal to, the more mesmerizing the effect. The objects you use in your se-
duction (gifts, clothes, etc.) speak their own language, and it is a powerful
one. Never ignore a detail or leave one to chance. Orchestrate them into a
spectacle and no one will notice how manipulative you are being.
The Sensuous Effect
One day a messenger told Prince Genji—the aging but still consum-
mate seducer in the Heian court of late-tenth-century Japan—that
one of his youthful conquests had suddenly died, leaving behind an or-
phan, a young woman named Tamakazura. Genji was not Tamakazura s fa-
ther, but he decided to bring her to court and be her protector anyway.
Soon after her arrival, men of the highest rank began to woo her. Genji
had told everyone she was a lost daughter of his; as a result, they assumed
that she was beautiful, for Genji was the handsomest man in the court. (At
the time, men rarely saw a young girl's face before marriage; in theory, they
were allowed to talk to her only if she was on the other side of a screen.)
Genji showered her with attention, helping her sort through all the love
letters she was receiving and advising her on the right match.
As Tamakazura's protector, Genji was able to see her face, and she was
indeed beautiful. He fell in love with her. What a shame, he thought, to
give this lovely creature away to another man. One night, overwhelmed bywork ruin and loss to the
grand cloth of gold and web
of silver, to tinsel
and silken stuffs, pearls and
precious stones, 'tis plain
how his ardour and
satisfaction be increased
manifold—far more than
with some simple
shepherdess or other woman
of like quality, be she as
fair as she may. • And why
of yore was Venus found so
fair and so desirable, if not
that with all her beauty she
was always gracefully
attired likewise, and
generally scented, that she
did ever smell sweet an
hundred paces away? For it
hath ever been held of all
how that perfumes be a
great incitement to love. •
This is the reason why the
Empresses and great dames
of Rome did make much
usage of these perfumes, as
do likewise our great ladies
of France—and above all
those of Spain and Italy,
which from the oldest times
have been more curious and
more exquisite in luxury
than Frenchwomen, as well
in perfumes as in costumes
and magnificent attire,
whereof the fair ones of
France have since borrowed
the patterns and copied the
dainty workmanship.
Moreover the others, Italian
and Spanish, had learned
the same from old models
and ancient statues of
Roman ladies, the which
are to be seen among
sundry other antiquities yet
extant in Spain and Italy;
the which, if any man will
regard them carefully, will
be found very perfect in
mode of hair-dressing and
fashion of robes, and very
meet to incite love.
—SEIGNEUR DE BRANTÔME,
LIVES OF FAIR & GALLANT
LADIES, TRANSLATED BY A. R.
ALLINSON
270 • The Art of Seduction
her charms, he held her hand and told her how much she resembled her
mother, whom he once had loved. She trembled—not with excitement,
however, but with fear, for although he was not her father, he was supposed
to be her protector, not a suitor. Her attendants were away and it was a
beautiful night. Genji silently threw off his perfumed robe and pulled her
down beside him. She began to cry, and to resist. Always a gentleman,
Genji told her that he would respect her wishes, he would always care for
her, and she had nothing to fear. He then politely excused himself.
Several days later Genji was helping Tamakazura with her correspon-
dence when he read a love letter from his younger brother, Prince Hotaru,
who numbered among her suitors. In the letter, Hotaru berated Tama-
kazura for not letting him get physically close enough to talk to her and tell
her his feelings. Tamakazura had not replied; unused to the manners of the
court, she had felt shy and intimidated. As if to help her, Genji got one of
his servants to write to Hotaru in her name. The letter, written on beauti-
ful perfumed paper, warmly invited the prince to visit her.
Hotaru appeared at the appointed hour. He smelled a beguiling in-
cense, mysterious and seductive. (Mixed into this scent was Genji's own
perfume.) The prince felt a wave of excitement. Approaching the screen
behind which Tamakazura sat, he confessed his love for her. Without mak-
ing a sound, she retreated to another screen, farther away. Suddenly there
was a flash of light, as if a torch had flared up, and Hotaru saw her profile
behind the screen: she was more beautiful than he had imagined. Two
things delighted the prince: the sudden, mysterious flash of light, and the
brief glimpse of his beloved. Now he was truly in love.
Hotaru began to court her assiduously. Meanwhile, feeling reassured that
Genji was no longer chasing her, Tamakazura saw her protector more often.
And now she could not help noticing little details: Genji's robes seemed to
glow, in pleasing and vibrant colors, as if dyed by unworldly hands. Hotaru's
robes seemed drab by comparison. And the perfumes burned into Genji's
garments, how intoxicating they were. No one else bore such a scent. Ho-
taru's letters were polite and well written, but the letters Genji sent her were
on magnificent paper, perfumed and dyed, and they quoted lines of poetry,
always surprising yet always appropriate for the occasion. Genji also grew
and gathered flowers—wild carnations, for instance—that he gave as gifts
and that seemed to symbolize his unique charm.
One evening Genji proposed to teach Tamakazura how to play the
koto. She was delighted. She loved to read romance novels, and whenever
Genji played the koto, she felt as if she were transported into one of her
books. No one played the instrument better than Genji; she would be hon-
ored to learn from him. Now he saw her often, and the method of his
lessons was simple: she would choose a song for him to play, and then
would try to imitate him. After they played, they would lie down side by
side, their heads resting on the koto, staring up at the moon. Genji would
have torches set up in the garden, giving the view the softest glow.
The more Tamakazura saw of the court—of Prince Hotaru, the otherFor years after her entry
into the palace, a large
number of court-maidens
were especially set aside for
preparing Kuei-fei 's
dresses, which were chosen
and fashioned according to
the flowers of the season.
For instance, for New Year
(spring) she had blossoms
of apricot, plum and
narcissus; for summer, she
adopted the lotus; for
autumn, she patterned
them after the peony; for
winter, she employed the
chrysanthemum. Of
jewelry she was fondest of
pearls, and the finest
products of the world found
their way into her boudoir
and were frequently
embroidered on her
numerous dresses. • Kuei-
fei was the embodiment of
all that was lovely and
extravagant. No wonder
that no king, prince,
courtier or humble
attendant who ever met her
could resist the allurement
of her charms. Besides, she
was the most artful of
women and knew how to
use her natural gifts to the
best purpose. . . . The
Emperor Ming Huang,
supreme in the land and
with thousands of the most
handsome maidens to
choose from, became a
complete slave to her
magnetic powers . . .
spending day and night in
her company and giving up
his whole kingdom
for her sake.
—SHU-CHIUNG, YANG KUEI-
FEI: THE MOST FAMOUS
BEAUTY OF CHINA
Then [Pao-yu] called
Bright Design to him and
said to her, "Go and see
what [Black Jade] is doing.
If she asks about me, just
say that I am quite all
