The Ideal Lover • 37
and would serve as her vassal. He would go through terrible trials on her
behalf, undertake dangerous pilgrimages in her name, suffer awful tortures
to prove his love. (This could include bodily mutilation, such as tearing off
of fingernails, the cutting of an ear, etc.) He would also write poems and
sing beautiful songs to her, for no troubadour could succeed without some
kind of aesthetic or spiritual quality to impress his lady. The key to the ar-
chetype is a sense of absolute devotion. A man who will not let matters of
warfare, glory, or money intrude into the fantasy of courtship has limitless
power. The troubadour role is an ideal because people who do not put
themselves and their own interests first are truly rare. For a woman to at-
tract the intense attention of such a man is immensely appealing to her
vanity.
In eighteenth-century Osaka, a man named Nisan took the courtesan
Dewa out walking, first taking care to sprinkle the clover bushes along the
path with water, which looked like morning dew. Dewa was greatly moved
by this beautiful sight. "I have heard," she said, "that loving couples of deer
are wont to lie behind clover bushes. How I should like to see this in real
life!" Nisan had heard enough. That very day he had a section of her house
torn down and ordered the planting of dozens of clover bushes in what had
once been a part of her bedroom. That night, he arranged for peasants to
round up wild deer from the mountains and bring them to the house. The
next day Dewa awoke to precisely the scene she had described. Once she
appeared overwhelmed and moved, he had the clover and deer taken away
and the house rebuilt.
One of history's most gallant lovers, Sergei Saltykov, had the misfortune
to fall in love with one of history's least available women: the Grand Duchess
Catherine, future empress of Russia. Catherine's every move was watched
over by her husband, Peter, who suspected her of trying to cheat on him
and appointed servants to keep an eye on her. She was isolated, unloved,
and unable to do anything about it. Saltykov, a handsome young army offi-
cer, was determined to be her rescuer. In 1752 he befriended Peter, and
also the couple in charge of watching over Catherine. In this way he was
able to see her and occasionally exchange a word or two with her that re-
vealed his intentions. He performed the most foolhardy and dangerous ma-
neuvers to be able to see her alone, including diverting her horse during a
royal hunt and riding off into the forest with her. He told her how much
he sympathized with her plight, and that he would do anything to help her.
To be caught courting Catherine would have meant death, and eventu-
ally Peter came to suspect that something was up between his wife and
Saltykov, though he was never sure. His enmity did not discourage the
dashing officer, who just put still more energy and ingenuity into finding
ways to arrange secret trysts. The couple were lovers for two years, and
Saltykov was undoubtedly the father of Catherine's son Paul, later the em-
peror of Russia. When Peter finally got rid of him by sending him off to
Sweden, news of his gallantry traveled ahead of him, and women swooned
38 • The Art of Seduction
to be his next conquest. You may not have to go to as much trouble or risk,
but you will always be rewarded for actions that reveal a sense of self-
sacrifice or devotion.
The embodiment of the Ideal Lover for the 1920s was Rudolph Valen-
tino, or at least the image created of him in film. Everything he did—the
gifts, the flowers, the dancing, the way he took a woman's hand—showed a
scrupulous attention to the details that would signify how much he was
thinking of her. The image was of a man who made courtship take time,
transforming it into an aesthetic experience. Men hated Valentino, because
women now expected them to match the ideal of patience and attentive-
ness that he represented. Yet nothing is more seductive than patient atten-
tiveness. It makes the affair seem lofty, aesthetic, not really about sex. The
power of a Valentino, particularly nowadays, is that people like this are so
rare. The art of playing to a woman's ideal has almost disappeared—which
only makes it that much more alluring.
If the chivalrous lover remains the ideal for women, men often idealize
the Madonna/whore, a woman who combines sensuality with an air of
spirituality or innocence. Think of the great courtesans of the Italian Re-
naissance, such as Tullia d'Aragona—essentially a prostitute, like all courte-
sans, but able to disguise her social role by establishing a reputation as a poet
and philosopher. Tullia was what was then known as an "honest courtesan."
Honest courtesans would go to church, but they had an ulterior motive: for
men, their presence at Mass was exciting. Their houses were pleasure
palaces, but what made these homes so visually delightful was their art-
works and shelves full of books, volumes of Petrarch and Dante. For the
man, the thrill, the fantasy, was to sleep with a woman who was sexual yet
had the ideal qualities of a mother and the spirit and intellect of an artist.
Where the pure prostitute excited desire but also disgust, the honest cour-
tesan made sex seem elevated and innocent, as if it were happening in the
Garden of Eden. Such women held immense power over men. To this day
they remain an ideal, if for no other reason than that they offer such a range
of pleasures. The key is ambiguity—to combine the appearance of sensi-
tivity to the pleasures of the flesh with an air of innocence, spirituality, a
poetic sensibility. This mix of the high and the low is immensely seductive.
The dynamics of the Ideal Lover have limitless possibilities, not all of
them erotic. In politics, Talleyrand essentially played the role of the Ideal
Lover with Napoleon, whose ideal in both a cabinet minister and a friend
was a man who was aristocratic, smooth with the ladies—all the things that
Napoleon himself was not. In 1798, when Talleyrand was the French for-
eign minister, he hosted a party in Napoleon's honor after the great gen-
eral's dazzling military victories in Italy. To the day Napoleon died, he
remembered this party as the best he had ever attended. It was a lavish af-
fair, and Talleyrand wove a subtle message into it by placing Roman busts
around the house, and by talking to Napoleon of reviving the imperial glo-
ries of ancient Rome. This sparked a glint in the leader's eye, and indeed, a
few years later, Napoleon gave himself the title of emperor—a move that
