Appendix B: Soft Seduction: How to Sell Anything to the Masses • 451
been criticized as the rich man's president, but the TV pictures say it isn't
so. At seventy-three, Mr. Reagan could have an age problem. But the TV
pictures say it isn't so. Americans want to feel proud of their country again,
and of their president. And the TV pictures say you can. The orchestration
of television coverage absorbs the White House. Their goal? To emphasize
the president's greatest asset, which, his aides say, is his personality. They
provide pictures of him looking like a leader. Confident, with his Marlboro
man walk."
Over images of Reagan shaking hands with handicapped athletes in
wheelchairs and cutting the ribbon at a new facility for seniors, Stahl con-
tinued, "They also aim to erase the negatives. Mr. Reagan tried to counter
the memory of an unpopular issue with a carefully chosen backdrop that
actually contradicts the president's policy. Look at the handicapped Olym-
pics, or the opening ceremony of an old-age home. No hint that he tried
to cut the budgets for the disabled and for federally subsidized housing for
the elderly." On and on went the piece, showing the gap between the feel-
good images that played on the screen and the reality of Reagan's actions.
"President Reagan," Stahl concluded, "is accused of running a campaign in
which he highlights the images and hides from the issues. But there's no
evidence that the charges will hurt him because when people see the presi-
dent on television, he makes them feel good, about America, about them-
selves, and about him."
Stahl depended on the good will of the Reagan people in covering the
White House, but her piece was strongly negative, so she braced herself for
trouble. Yet a senior White House official telephoned her that evening:
"Great piece," he said. "What?" asked a stunned Stahl. "Great piece," he re-
peated. "Did you listen to what I said?" she asked. "Lesley, when you're
showing four and a half minutes of great pictures of Ronald Reagan, no
one listens to what you say. Don't you know that the pictures are overriding
your message because they conflict with your message? The public sees
those pictures and they block your message. They didn't even hear what
you said. So, in our minds, it was a four-and-a-half-minute free ad for the
Ronald Reagan campaign for reelection."
Interpretation. Most of the men who worked on communications for
Reagan had a background in marketing. They knew the importance of
telling a story crisply, sharply, and with good visuals. Each morning they
went over what the headline of the day should be, and how they could
shape this into a short visual piece, getting the president into a video op-
portunity. They paid detailed attention to the backdrop behind the presi-
dent in the Oval Office, to the way the camera framed him when he was
with other world leaders, and to having him filmed in motion, with his
confident walk. The visuals carried the message better than any words
could do. As one Reagan official said, "What are you going to believe, the
facts or your eyes?"
452 • Appendix B: Soft Seduction: How to Sell Anything to the Masses
Free yourself from the need to communicate in the normal direct man-
ner and you will present yourself with greater opportunities for the soft
sell. Make the words you say unobtrusive, vague, alluring. And pay much
greater attention to your style, the visuals, the story they tell. Convey a
sense of movement and progress by showing yourself in motion. Express
confidence not through facts and figures but through colors and positive
imagery, appealing to the infant in everyone. Let the media cover you un-
guided and you are at their mercy. So turn the dynamic around—the press
needs drama and visuals? Provide them. It is fine to discuss issues or "truth"
as long as you package it entertainingly. Remember: images linger in the
mind long after words are forgotten. Do not preach to the public—that
never works. Learn to express your message through visuals that insinuate
positive emotions and happy feelings.
4. In 1919, the movie press agent Harry Reichenbach was asked to do ad-
vance publicity for a picture called The Virgin of Stamboul. It was the usual
romantic potboiler in an exotic locale, and normally a publicist would
mount a campaign with alluring posters and advertisements. But Harry
never operated the usual way. He had begun his career as a carnival barker,
and there the only way to get the public into your tent was to stand out
from the other barkers. So Harry dug up eight scruffy Turks whom he
found living in Manhattan, dressed them up in costumes (flowing sea-green
trousers, gold-crescented turbans) provided by the movie studio, rehearsed
them in every line and gesture, and checked them into an expensive hotel.
Word quickly spread to the newspapers (with a little help from Harry) that
a delegation of Turks had arrived in New York on a secret diplomatic
mission.
Reporters converged on the hotel. Since his appearance in New York
was clearly no longer a secret, the head of the mission, "Sheikh Ali Ben
Mohammed," invited them up to his suite. The newspapermen were im-
pressed by the Turks' colorful outfits, salaams, and rituals. The sheikh then
explained why he had come to New York. A beautiful young woman
named Sari, known as the Virgin of Stamboul, had been betrothed to the
sheikh's brother. An American soldier passing through had fallen in love
with her and had managed to steal her from her home and take her to
America. Her mother had died from grief. The sheikh had found out she
was in New York, and had come to bring her back.
Mesmerized by the sheikh's colorful language and by the romantic tale
he told, the reporters filled the papers with stories of the Virgin of Stam-
boul for the next several days. The sheikh was filmed in Central Park and
feted by the cream of New York society. Finally "Sari" was found, and the
press reported the reunion between the sheikh and the hysterical girl (an
actress with an exotic look). Soon after, The Virgin of Stamboul opened in
New York. Its story was much like the "real" events reported in the papers.
Was this a coincidence? A quickly made film version of the true story? No
