Create a False Sense of Security—Approach Indirectly • 183
initially dazzle the ladies with his good looks, stylish clothing, and cha-
risma. But once he was alone with a woman, he would take a slight step
back, becoming excessively polite, making only small talk. Banal conversa-
tion can be a brilliant tactic; it hypnotizes the target. The dullness of your
front gives the subtlest suggestive word, the slightest look, an amplified
power. Never mention love and you make its absence speak volumes—your
victims will wonder why you never discuss your emotions, and as they have
such thoughts, they will go further, imagining what else is going on in your
mind. They will be the ones to bring up the topic of love or affection. De-
liberate dullness has many applications. In psychotherapy, the doctor makes
monosyllabic responses to draw patients in, making them relax and open
up. In international negotiations, Henry Kissinger would lull diplomats
with boring details, then strike with bold demands. Early in a seduction,
less-colorful words are often more effective than vivid ones—the target
tunes them out, looks at your face, begins to imagine, fantasize, fall under
your spell.
Getting to your targets through other people is extremely effective; in-
filtrate their circle and you are no longer a stranger. Before the seventeenth-
century seducer Count de Grammont made a move, he would befriend his
target's chambermaid, her valet, a friend, even a lover. In this way he could
gather information, finding a way to approach her in an unthreatening
manner. He could also plant ideas, saying things the third party was likely
to repeat, things that would intrigue the lady, particularly when they came
from someone she knew.
Ninon de l'Enclos, the seventeenth-century courtesan and strategist of
seduction, believed that disguising one's intentions was not only a necessity,
it added to the pleasure of the game. A man should never declare his feel-
ings, she felt, particularly early on. It is irritating and provokes mistrust. "A
woman is much better persuaded that she is loved by what she guesses than
by what she is told," Ninon once remarked. Often a person's haste in de-
claring his or her feelings comes from a false desire to please, thinking this
will flatter the other. But the desire to please can annoy and offend. Chil-
dren, cats, and coquettes draw us to them by apparently not trying, even by
seeming uninterested. Learn to disguise your feelings and let people figure
out what is happening for themselves.
In all arenas of life, you should never give the impression that you are
angling for something—that will raise a resistance that you will never lower.
Learn to approach people from the side. Mute your colors, blend in, seem
unthreatening, and you will have more room to maneuver later on. The
same holds true in politics, where overt ambition often frightens people.
Vladimir Ilyich Lenin at first glance looked like an everyday Russian; he
dressed like a worker, spoke with a peasant accent, had no air of greatness.
This made the public feel comfortable and identify with him. Yet beneath
this apparently bland appearance, of course, was a deeply clever man who
was always maneuvering. By the time people realized this it was too late.Jove himself—I care not
if he hears me!" Jove
laughed to hear her words.
Delighted to be preferred to
himself, he kissed her—not
with the restraint becoming
to a maiden's kisses: and
as she began to tell of her
hunting exploits in the
forest, he prevented her by
his embrace, and betrayed
his real self by a shameful
action. So far from
complying, she resisted
him as far as a woman
could . . . but how could a
girl overcome a man, and
who could defeat Jupiter?
He had his way, and
returned to the upper air.
—OVID, METAMORPHOSES,
TRANSLATED BY MARY M. INNES
I had rather hear my dog
bark at a crow than a man
swear he loves me.
—BEATRICE, IN WILLIAM
SHAKESPEARE, MUCH ADO
ABOUT NOTHING
I know of a man whose
beloved was completely
friendly and at ease with
him; but if he had
disclosed by the least
gesture that he was in love,
the beloved would have
become as remote from
him as the Pleiades, whose
stars hang so high in
heaven. It is a sort of
statesmanship that is
required in such cases; the
party concerned was
enjoying the pleasure of his
loved one's company
intensely and to the last
degree, but if he had so
much as hinted at his inner
feelings he would have
attained but a miserable
fraction of the beloved's
favor, and endured into the
bargain all the arrogance
184 • The Art of Seduction
Symbol: The Spider's Web. The spider finds an innocuous corner in
which to spin its web. The longer the web takes, the more fabulous
its construction, yet few really notice it—its gossamer threads are
nearly invisible. The spider has no need to chase for food, or
even to move. It quietly sits in the corner, waiting for its
victims to come to it on their own, and ensnare
themselves in the web.
Reversal
In warfare, you need space to align your troops, room to maneuver. The
more space you have, the more intricate your strategy can be. But some-
times it is better to overwhelm the enemy, giving them no time to think or
react. Although Casanova adapted his strategies to the woman in question,
he would often try to make an immediate impression, stirring her desire at
the first encounter. Perhaps he would perform some gallantry, rescuing a
woman in danger; perhaps he would dress so that his target would notice
him in a crowd. In either case, once he had the woman's attention he
would move with lightning speed. A Siren like Cleopatra tries to have an
immediate physical effect on men, giving her victims no time or space to
retreat. She uses the element of surprise. The first period of your contact
with someone can involve a level of desire that will never be repeated;
boldness will carry the day.
But these are short seductions. The Sirens and the Casanovas only get
pleasure from the number of their victims, moving quickly from conquest
to conquest, and this can be tiring. Casanova burned himself out; Sirens,
insatiable, are never satisfied. The indirect, carefully constructed seduction
may reduce the number of your conquests, but more than compensate by
their quality.and caprice of which love is
capable.
—IBN HAZM; THE RING OF
THE DOVE: A TREATISE ON THE
ART AND PRACTICE OF ARAB
LOVE, TRANSLATED BY A. J.
ARBERRY
