332 • The Art of Seduction
and the sincerity of his sentiments. He could be sent on a quest, or made
to live among lepers, or compete in a possibly fatal joust for her honor.
And this he had to do without complaint. Although the days of the trouba-
dour are long gone, the pattern remains: a man actually loves to be able to
prove himself, to be challenged, to compete, to undergo tests and trials and
emerge victorious. He has a masochistic streak; a part of him loves pain.
And strangely enough, the more a woman asks for, the worthier she seems.
A woman who is easy to get cannot be worth much.
Make people compete for your attention, make them prove themselves
in some way, and you will find them rising to the challenge. The heat of
seduction is raised by such challenges—show me that you really love me.
When one person (of either sex) rises to the occasion, often the other per-
son is now expected to do the same, and the seduction heightens. By mak-
ing people prove themselves, too, you raise your value and cover up your
defects. Your targets are too busy trying to prove themselves to notice your
blemishes and faults.
Symbol: The Tour-
nament. On the field, with its bright pennants
and caparisoned horses, the lady looks on as knights fight for
her hand. She has heard them declare love on bended knee, their
endless songs and pretty promises. They are all good at such things.
But then the trumpet sounds and the combat begins. In the tourna-
ment there can be no faking or hesitation. The knight she
chooses must have blood on his face, and a few
broken limbs.
Reversal
When trying to prove that you are worthy of your target, remember
that every target sees things differently. A show of physical prowess
will not impress someone who does not value physical prowess; it will just
show that you are after attention, flaunting yourself. Seducers must adapt
their way of proving themselves to the doubts and weaknesses of the se-
duced. For some, fine words are better proofs than daredevil deeds, particu-
larly if they are written down. With these people show your sentiments in
a letter—a different kind of physical proof, and one with more poetic ap-
peal than some showy bit of action. Know your target well, and aim your
seductive evidence at the source of their doubts or resistance.
Effect a Regression
People who
have experienced a certain kind of
pleasure in the past will try to repeat or relive
it. The deepest-rooted and most pleasurable memories
are usually those from earliest childhood, and are often un-
consciously associated with a parental figure. Bring your tar-
gets back to that point by placing yourself in the oedipal triangle
and positioning them as the needy child. Unaware of the cause of
their emotional response, they will fall in love with you. Alterna-
tively, you too can regress, letting them play the role of the pro-
tecting, nursing parent. In either case you are offering the
ultimate fantasy: the chance to have an intimate rela-
tionship with mommy or daddy, son or daughter.
