46 • The Art of Seduction
there on holiday with her mother; Rée had managed to accompany her on
long walks through the city, unchaperoned, and they had had many conver-
sations. Her ideas on God and Christianity were quite similar to Nietz-
sche's, and when Rée had told her that the famous philosopher was a friend
of his, she had insisted that he invite Nietzsche to join them. In subsequent
letters Ree described how mysteriously captivating Salomé was, and how
anxious she was to meet Nietzsche. The philosopher soon went to Rome.
When Nietzsche finally met Salomé, he was overwhelmed. She had the
most beautiful eyes he had ever seen, and during their first long talk those
eyes lit up so intensely that he could not help feeling there was something
erotic about her excitement. Yet he was also confused: Salomé kept her dis-
tance, and did not respond to his compliments. What a devilish young
woman. A few days later she read him a poem of hers, and he cried; her
ideas about life were so like his own. Deciding to seize the moment, Nietz-
sche proposed marriage. (He did not know that Ree had done so as well.)
Salomé declined. She was interested in philosophy, life, adventure, not mar-
riage. Undaunted, Nietzsche continued to court her. On an excursion to
Lake Orta with Rée, Salomé, and her mother, he managed to get the girl
alone, accompanying her on a walk up Monte Sacro while the others stayed
behind. Apparently the views and Nietzsche's words had the proper pas-
sionate effect; in a later letter to her, he described this walk as "the most
beautiful dream of my life." Now he was a man possessed: all he could
think about was marrying Salomé and having her all to himself.
A few months later Salomé visited Nietzsche in Germany. They took
long walks together, and stayed up all night discussing philosophy. She mir-
rored his deepest thoughts, anticipated his ideas about religion. Yet when
he again proposed marriage, she scolded him as conventional: it was Nietz-
sche, after all, who had developed a philosophical defense of the superman,
the man above everyday morality, yet Salomé was by nature far less conven-
tional than he was. Her firm, uncompromising manner only deepened the
spell she cast over him, as did her hint of cruelty When she finally left him,
making it clear that she had no intention of marrying him, Nietzsche was
devastated. As an antidote to his pain, he wrote Thus Spake Zarathustra, a
book full of sublimated eroticism and deeply inspired by his talks with her.
From then on Salomé was known throughout Europe as the woman who
had broken Nietzsche's heart.
Salomé moved to Berlin. Soon the city's greatest intellectuals were
falling under the spell of her independence and free spirit. The playwrights
Gerhart Hauptmann and Franz Wedekind became infatuated with her; in
1897, the great Austrian poet Rainer Maria Rilke fell in love with her. By
that time her reputation was widely known, and she was a published novel-
ist. This certainly played a part in seducing Rilke, but he was also attracted
by a kind of masculine energy he found in her that he had never seen in a
woman. Rilke was then twenty-two, Salomé thirty-six. He wrote her love
letters and poems, followed her everywhere, and began an affair with her
that was to last several years. She corrected his poetry, imposed disciplineDandyism is not even, as
many unthinking people
seem to suppose, an
immoderate interest in
personal appearance and
material elegance. For the
true dandy these things are
only a symbol oj the
aristocratic superiority of his
personality. . . . • What,
then, is this ruling passion
that has turned into a creed
and created its own skilled
tyrants? What is this
unwritten constitution that
has created so haughty a
caste? It is, above all, a
burning need to acquire
originality, within the
apparent bounds of
convention. It is a sort of
cult of oneself, which can
dispense even with what are
commonly called illusions. It
is the delight in causing
astonishment, and the
proud satisfaction of
never oneself being
astonished. . . .
—CHARLES BAUDELAIRE, THE
DANDY, QUOTED IN VICE: AN
ANTHOLOGY, EDITED BY
RICHARD DAVENPORT-HINES
In the midst of this display
of statesmanship,
eloquence, cleverness, and
exalted ambition,
Alcibiades lived a life of
prodigious luxury,
drunkenness, debauchery,
and insolence. He was
effeminate in his dress and
would walk through the
market-place trailing his
long purple robes, and he
spent extravagantly. He
had the decks of his
triremes cut away to allow
him to sleep more
comfortably, and his
bedding was slung on cords,
rather than spread on the
hard planks. He had a
golden shield made for
him, which was
emblazoned not with any
The Dandy • 41
on his overly romantic verse, inspired ideas for new poems. But she was put
off by his childish dependence on her, his weakness. Unable to stand weak-
ness of any kind, she eventually left him. Consumed by her memory, Rilke
long continued to pursue her. In 1926, lying on his deathbed, he begged
his doctors, "Ask Lou what is wrong with me. She is the only one who
knows."
One man wrote of Salomé, "There was something terrifying about her
embrace. Looking at you with her radiant blue eyes, she would say, 'The
reception of the semen is for me the height of ecstasy.' And she had an in-
satiable appetite for it. She was completely amoral ... a vampire." The
Swedish psychotherapist Poul Bjerre, one of her later conquests, wrote, "I
think Nietzsche was right when he said that Lou was a thoroughly evil
woman. Evil however in the Goethean sense: evil that produces good. . . .
She may have destroyed lives and marriages but her presence was exciting."
The two emotions that almost every male felt in the presence of Lou
Andreas-Salomé were confusion and excitement—the two prerequisite
feelings for any successful seduction. People were intoxicated by her strange
mix of the masculine and the feminine; she was beautiful, with a radiant
smile and a graceful, flirtatious manner, but her independence and her in-
tensely analytical nature made her seem oddly male. This ambiguity was
expressed in her eyes, which were both coquettish and probing. It was con-
fusion that kept men interested and curious: no other woman was like this.
They wanted to know more. The excitement stemmed from her ability to
stir up repressed desires. She was a complete nonconformist, and to be in-
volved with her was to break all kinds of taboos. Her masculinity made the
relationship seem vaguely homosexual; her slightly cruel, slightly domi-
neering streak could stir up masochistic yearnings, as it did in Nietzsche.
Salomé radiated a forbidden sexuality. Her powerful effect on men—the
lifelong infatuations, the suicides (there were several), the periods of intense
creativity, the descriptions of her as a vampire or a devil—attest to the ob-
scure depths of the psyche that she was able to reach and disturb.
The Masculine Dandy succeeds by reversing the normal pattern of
male superiority in matters of love and seduction. A man's apparent inde-
pendence, his capacity for detachment, often seems to give him the upper
hand in the dynamic between men and women. A purely feminine woman
will arouse desire, but is always vulnerable to the man's capricious loss of
interest; a purely masculine woman, on the other hand, will not arouse that
interest at all. Follow the path of the Masculine Dandy, however, and you
neutralize all a man's powers. Never give completely of yourself; while you
are passionate and sexual, always retain an air of independence and self-
possession. You might move on to the next man, or so he will think. You
have other, more important matters to concern yourself with, such as your
work. Men do not know how to fight women who use their own weapons
against them; they are intrigued, aroused, and disarmed. Few men can resist
the taboo pleasures offered up to them by the Masculine Dandy.ancestral device, but with
the figure of Eros armed
with a thunderbolt. The
leading men of Athens
watched all this with
disgust and indignation
and they were deeply
disturbed by his
contemptuous and lawless
behaviour, which seemed to
them monstrous and
suggested the habits of a
tyrant. The people's feelings
towards him have been very
aptly expressed by
Aristophanes in the line:
"They long for him, they
hate him, they cannot do
without him. . . ." • The
fact was that his voluntary
donations, the public shows
he supported, his unrivalled
munificence to the state, the
fame of his ancestry, the
power of his oratory and
his physical strength and
beauty . . . all combined to
make the Athenians forgive
him everything else, and
they were constantly finding
euphemisms for his lapses
and putting them down to
youthful high spirits
and honourable ambition.
—PLUTARCH,"THE LIFE OF
ALCIBIADES," THE RISE AND
FALL OF ATHENS: NINE GREEK
LIVES, TRANSLATED BY IAN
SCOTT-KILVERT
Further light—a whole
flood of it—is thrown
upon this attraction of
the male in petticoats for
the female, in the diary
of the Abbé de Choisy, one
of the most brilliant men-
women of history, of whom
we shall hear a great deal
more later. The abbé, a
churchman of Paris, was a
constant masquerader in
female attire. He lived in
the days of Louis XIV, and
was a great friend of Louis'
brother, also addicted to
women's clothes. A young
