114 • The Art of Seduction
self, lifting himself up from the bottom. The deliverer must be a living ex-
ample of personal redemption.
The essence of charisma is an overpowering emotion that communi-
cates itself in your gestures, In your tone of voice, in subtle signs that are
the more powerful for being unspoken. You feel something more deeply
than others, and no emotion is more powerful and more capable of creating
a charismatic reaction than hatred, particularly if it comes from deep-
rooted feelings of oppression. Express what others are afraid to express and
they will see great power in you. Say what they want to say but cannot.
Never be afraid of going too far. If you represent a release from oppression,
you have the leeway to go still farther. Moses spoke of violence, of destroy-
ing every last one of his enemies. Language like this brings the oppressed
together and makes them feel more alive. This is not, however, something
that is uncontrollable on your part. Malcolm X felt rage from early on, but
only in prison did he teach himself the art of oratory, and how to channel
his emotions. Nothing is more charismatic than the sense that someone is
struggling with great emotion rather than simply giving in to it.
The Olympian actor. On January 24, 1960 an insurrection broke out in
Algeria, then still a French colony. Led by right-wing French soldiers, its
purpose was to forestall the proposal of President Charles de Gaulle to
grant Algeria the right of self-determination. If necessary, the insurrection-
ists would take over Algeria in the name of France.
For several tense days, the seventy-year-old de Gaulle maintained a
strange silence. Then on January 29, at eight in the evening, he appeared
on French national television. Before he had uttered a word, the audience
was astonished, for he wore his old uniform from World War II, a uniform
that everyone recognized and that created a strong emotional response. De
Gaulle had been the hero of the resistance, the savior of the country at its
darkest moment. But that uniform had not been seen for quite some time.
Then de Gaulle spoke, reminding his public, in his cool and confident
manner, of all they had accomplished together in liberating France from
the Germans. Slowly he moved from these charged patriotic issues to the
rebellion in Algeria, and the affront it presented to the spirit of the libera-
tion. He finished his address by repeating his famous words of June 18,
1940: "Once again I call all Frenchmen, wherever they are, whatever they
are, to reunite with France. Vive la République! Vive la France!"
The speech had two purposes. It showed that de Gaulle was deter-
mined not to give an inch to the rebels, and it reached for the heart of all
patriotic Frenchmen, particularly in the army. The insurrection quickly
died, and no one doubted the connection between its failure and de
Gaulle's performance on television.
The following year, the French voted overwhelmingly in favor of Al-
gerian self-determination. On April 11, 1961, de Gaulle gave a press con-
ference in which he made it clear that France would soon grant the
The Charismatic • 115
country full independence. Eleven days later, French generals in Algeria is-
sued a communique stating that they had taken over the country and de-
claring a state of siege. This was the most dangerous moment of all: faced
with Algeria's imminent independence, these right-wing generals would go
all the way. A civil war could break out, toppling de Gaulle's government.
The following night, de Gaulle appeared once again on television, once
again wearing his old uniform. He mocked the generals, comparing them
to a South American junta. He talked calmly and sternly. Then, suddenly,
at the very end of the address, his voice rose and even trembled as he called
out to the audience: "Françaises, Français, aidez-moi!" ("Frenchwomen,
Frenchmen, help me!") It was the most stirring moment of all his televi-
sion appearances. French soldiers in Algeria, listening on transistor radios,
were overwhelmed. The next day they held a mass demonstration in favor
of de Gaulle. Two days later the generals surrendered. On July 1, 1962, de
Gaulle proclaimed Algeria's independence.
In 1940, after the German invasion of France, de Gaulle escaped to En-
gland to recruit an army that would eventually return to France for the lib-
eration. At the beginning, he was alone, and his mission seemed hopeless.
But he had the support of Winston Churchill, and with Churchill's blessing
he gave a series of radio talks that the BBC broadcast to France. His
strange, hypnotic voice, with its dramatic tremolos, would enter French liv-
ing rooms in the evenings. Few of his listeners even knew what he looked
like, but his tone was so confident, so stirring, that he recruited a silent
army of believers. In person, de Gaulle was a strange, brooding man whose
confident manner could just as easily irritate as win over. But over the radio
that voice had intense charisma. De Gaulle was the first great master of
modern media, for he easily transferred his dramatic skills to television,
where his iciness, his calmness, his total self-possession, made audiences feel
both comforted and inspired.
The world has grown more fractured. A nation no longer conies to-
gether on the streets or in the squares; it is brought together in living
rooms, where people watching television all over the country can simulta-
neously be alone and with others. Charisma must now be communicable
over the airwaves or it has no power. But it is in some ways easier to project
on television, both because television makes a direct one-on-one appeal
(the Charismatic seems to address you) and because charisma is fairly easy to
fake for the few moments you spend in front of the camera. As de Gaulle
understood, when appearing on television it is best to radiate calmness and
control, to use dramatic effects sparingly. De Gaulle's overall iciness made
doubly effective the brief moments in which he raised his voice, or let
loose a biting joke. By remaining calm and underplaying it, he hypnotized
his audience. (Your face can express much more if your voice is less stri-
dent.) He conveyed emotion visually—the uniform, the setting—and
through the use of certain charged words: the liberation, Joan of Arc. The
less he strained for effect, the more sincere he appeared.
