The Charmer • 89
Stalin decided to teach the young upstart a lesson; he would give China
nothing. Tempers rose. Mao sent urgently for Zhou Enlai who arrived the
next day and went right to work.
In the long negotiating sessions, Zhou made a show of enjoying his
hosts' vodka. He never argued, and in fact agreed that the Chinese had
made many mistakes, had much to learn from the more experienced Sovi-
ets: "Comrade Stalin," he said, "we are the first large Asian country to join
the socialist camp under your guidance." Zhou had come prepared with all
kinds of neatly drawn diagrams and charts, knowing the Russians loved
such things. Stalin warmed up to him. The negotiations proceeded, and a
few days after Zhou's arrival, the two parties signed a treaty of mutual aid—
a treaty far more useful to the Chinese than to the Soviets.
In 1959, China was again in deep trouble. Mao's Great Leap Forward,
an attempt to spark an overnight industrial revolution in China, had been
a devastating failure. The people were angry: they were starving while
Beijing bureaucrats lived well. Many Beijing officials, Zhou among them,
returned to their native towns to try to bring order. Most of them managed
by bribes—by promising all kinds of favors—but Zhou proceeded differ-
ently: he visited his ancestral graveyard, where generations of his family
were buried, and ordered that the tombstones be removed and the coffins
buried deeper. Now the land could be farmed for food. In Confucian
terms (and Zhou was an obedient Confucian), this was sacrilege, but every-
one knew what it meant: Zhou was willing to suffer personally. Every-
one had to sacrifice, even the leaders. His gesture had immense symbolic
impact.
When Zhou died, in 1976, an unofficial and unorganized outpouring
of public grief caught the government by surprise. They could not under-
stand how a man who had worked behind the scenes, and had shunned the
adoration of the masses, could have won such affection.
The capture of Chiang Kai-shek was a turning point in the civil war. To
execute him might have been disastrous: it had been Chiang who had held
the Nationalist army together, and without him it could have broken up
into factions, allowing the Japanese to overrun the country. To force him to
sign an agreement would have not helped either: he would have lost face
before his army, would never have honored the agreement, and would have
done everything he could to avenge his humiliation. Zhou knew that to
execute or compel a captive will only embolden your enemy, and will have
repercussions you cannot control. Charm, on the other hand, is a manipu-
lative weapon that disguises its own manipulativeness, letting you gain a
victory without stirring the desire for revenge.
Zhou worked on Chiang perfectly, paying him respect, playing the in-
ferior, letting him pass from the fear of execution to the relief of unex-
pected release. The general was allowed to leave with his dignity intact.
Zhou knew all this would soften him up, planting the seed of the idea that
perhaps the Communists were not so bad after all, and that he could change
90 • The Art of Seduction
his mind about them without looking weak, particularly if he did so inde-
pendently rather than while he was in prison. Zhou applied the same phi-
losophy to every situation: play the inferior, unthreatening and humble.
What will this matter if in the end you get what you want: time to recover
from a civil war, a treaty, the good will of the masses.
Time is the greatest weapon you have. Patiently keep in mind a long-
term goal and neither person nor army can resist you. And charm is the
best way of playing for time, of widening your options in any situation.
Through charm you can seduce your enemy into backing off, giving you
the psychological space to plot an effective counterstrategy. The key is to
make other people emotional while you remain detached. They may feel
grateful, happy, moved, arrogant—it doesn't matter, as long as they feel. An
emotional person is a distracted person. Give them what they want, appeal
to their self-interest, make them feel superior to you. When a baby has
grabbed a sharp knife, do not try to grab it back; instead, stay calm, offer
candy, and the baby will drop the knife to pick up the tempting morsel you
offer.
4. In 1761, Empress Elizabeth of Russia died, and her nephew ascended to
the throne as Czar Peter III. Peter had always been a little boy at heart—he
played with toy soldiers long past the appropriate age—and now, as czar, he
could finally do whatever he pleased and the world be damned. Peter con-
cluded a treaty with Frederick the Great that was highly favorable to the
foreign ruler (Peter adored Frederick, and particularly the disciplined way
his Prussian soldiers marched). This was a practical debacle, but in matters
of emotion and etiquette, Peter was even more offensive: he refused to
properly mourn his aunt the empress, resuming his war games and parties a
few days after the funeral. What a contrast he was to his wife, Catherine.
She was respectful during the funeral, was still wearing black months later,
and could be seen at all hours beside Elizabeth's tomb, praying and cry-
ing. She was not even Russian, but a German princess who had come east
to marry Peter in 1745 without speaking a word of the language. Even the
lowest peasant knew that Catherine had converted to the Russian Ortho-
dox Church, and had learned to speak Russian with incredible speed, and
beautifully. At heart, they thought, she was more Russian than all of those
fops in the court.
During these difficult months, while Peter offended almost everyone in
the country, Catherine discreetly kept a lover, Gregory Orlov, a lieutenant
in the guards. It was through Orlov that word spread of her piety, her pa-
triotism, her worthiness for rule; how much better to follow such a woman
than to serve Peter. Late into the night, Catherine and Orlov would talk,
and he would tell her the army was behind her and would urge her to stage
a coup. She would listen attentively, but would always reply that this was
not the time for such things. Orlov wondered to himself: perhaps she was
too gentle and passive for such a great step.
