396 • The Art of Seduction
made frequent trips to Paris to be with her, forgetting about his family, lav-
ishing money and gifts on her.
Otero's New York debut, in October of 1890, was an astounding suc-
cess. "Otero dances with abandon," read an article in The New York Times.
"Her lithe and supple body looks like that of a serpent writhing in quick,
graceful curves." In a few short weeks she became the toast of New York
society, performing at private parties late into the night. The tycoon Wil-
liam Vanderbilt courted her with expensive jewels and evenings on his
yacht. Other millionaires vied for her attention. Meanwhile Jurgens was
dipping into the company till to pay for presents for her—he would do
anything to keep her, a task in which he was facing heavy competition. A
few months later, after his embezzling became public, he was a ruined man.
He eventually committed suicide.
Otero went back to France, to Paris, and over the next few years rose to
become the most infamous courtesan of the Belle Epoque. Word spread
quickly: a night with La Belle Otero (as she was now known) was more ef-
fective than all the aphrodisiacs in the world. She had a temper, and was de-
manding, but that was to be expected. Prince Albert of Monaco, a man
who had been plagued by doubts of his virility, felt like an insatiable tiger
after a night with Otero. She became his mistress. Other royalty followed—
Prince Albert of Wales (later King Edward VII), the Shah of Persia, Grand
Duke Nicholas of Russia. Less wealthy men emptied their bank accounts,
and Jurgens was only the first of many whom Otero drove to suicide.
During World War I, a twenty-nine-year-old American soldier named
Frederick, stationed in France, won $37,000 in a four-day crap game. On
his next leave he went to Nice and checked himself into the finest hotel.
On his first night in the hotel restaurant, he recognized Otero sitting alone
at a table. He had seen her perform in Paris ten years before, and had be-
come obsessed with her. She was now close to fifty, but was more alluring
than ever. He greased some palms and was able to sit at her table. He could
hardly talk: the way her eyes bored into him, a simple readjustment in her
chair, her body brushing up against him as she got up, the way she managed
to walk in front of him and display herself. Later, strolling along a boule-
vard, they passed a jewelry store. He went inside, and moments later found
himself plopping down $31,000 for a diamond necklace. For three nights
La Belle Otero was his. Never in his life had he felt so masculine and im-
petuous. Years later, he still believed it was well worth the price he had
paid.
Interpretation. Although La Belle Otero was beautiful, hundreds of
women were more so, or were more charming and talented. But Otero was
constantly on fire. Men could read it in her eyes, the way her body moved,
a dozen other signs. The heat that radiated out from her came from her
own inner desires: she was insatiably sexual. But she was also a practiced
and calculating courtesan, and knew how to put her sexuality to effect.still quite a woman. •
"She looked right at me,
then turned to the lady she
was with—some friend, I
guess—and spoke to her in
English, which she thought
I didn't understand.
However, I did. •
" 'Who's the very
handsome young man?'
Otero asked. • "The other
one answered, 'He's
Chevalier.' • " 'He has
such beautiful eyes' ha
Belle said, looking straight
at me, right up and down.
• "Then she almost floored
me with her frankness. •
" 'I wonder if he'd like to
go to bed with me. I think
I'll ask him!' Only she
didn't say it so delicately.
She was much cruder and
more to the point. • "It
was at this moment I had
to make up my mind
rather quickly. La Belle
moved toward me. Instead
of introducing myself and
succumbing to the
consequences, I pretended I
didn't understand what
she'd said, uttered some
pleasantry in French and
moved away to my dressing
room. • "I could see La
Belle smile in an odd
fashion as I passed her;
like a sleek tigress watching
its dinner go away. For a
fleeting second I thought
she might turn around and
follow me. " • What would
Chevalier have done had
she pursued him? His
lower lip dropped into that
half pout which is the
Frenchman's exclusive
possession. Then he
grinned. • "I'd have
slowed down and let her
catch up."
—ARTHUR H. LEWIS,
LA BELLE OTERO
Use Physical Lures • 397
Onstage she made every man in the audience come alive, abandoning her-
self in dance. In person she was cooler, or slightly so. A man likes to feel
that a woman is enflamed not because she has an insatiable appetite but be-
cause of him; so Otero personalized her sexuality, using glances, a brushing
of skin, a more languorous tone of voice, a saucy comment, to suggest that
the man was heating her up. In her memoirs she revealed that Prince Albert
was a most inept lover. Yet he believed, along with many other men, that
with her he was Hercules himself. Her sexuality actually originated from
her, but she created the illusion that the man was the aggressor.
The key to luring the target into the final act of your seduction is not
to make it obvious, not to announce that you are ready (to pounce or be
pounced upon). Everything should be geared, not to the conscious mind,
but to the senses. You want your target to read cues not from your words or
actions but from your body. You must make your body glow with desire—
for the target. Your desire should be read in your eyes, in a trembling in
your voice, in your reaction when your bodies draw near.
You cannot train your body to act this way, but by choosing a victim
(see chapter 1) who has this effect on you, it will all flow naturally. During
the seduction, you will have had to hold yourself back, to intrigue and
frustrate the victim. You will have frustrated yourself in the process, and
will already be champing at the bit. Once you sense that the target has
fallen for you and cannot turn back, let those frustrated desires course
through your blood and warm you up. You do not need to touch your tar-
gets, or become physical. As La Belle Otero understood, sexual desire is
contagious. They will catch your heat and glow in return. Let them make
the first move. It will cover your tracks. The second and third moves are
yours.
Spell SEX with capital letters when you talk about Otero.
She exuded it.
—MAURICE CHEVALIER
Lowering Inhibitions
One day in 1931, in a village in New Guinea, a young girl named Tu-
perselai heard some happy news: her father, Allaman, who had left
some months before to work on a tobacco plantation, had returned for a
visit. Tuperselai ran to greet him. Accompanying her father was a white
man, an unusual sight in these parts. He was a twenty-two-year-old Aus-
tralian from Tasmania, and he was the owner of the plantation. His name
was Errol Flynn.
Flynn smiled warmly at Tuperselai, seeming particularly interested in
her bare breasts. (As was the custom in New Guinea then, she wore only a
grass skirt.) He said in pidgin English how beautiful she was, and kept re-
peating her name, which he pronounced remarkably well. He did not sayYou're anxiously expecting
me to escort you \ To
parties: here too solicit my
advice. \ Arrive late, when
the lamps are lit; make a
graceful entrance— \ Delay
enhances charm, delay's a
great bawd. \ Plain you
may be, but at night you'll
look fine to the tipsy: \
Soft lights and shadows
will mask your faults. \
Take your food with dainty
fingers: good table manners
matter: \ Don't besmear
your whole face with a
greasy paw. \ Don't cat
first at home, and nibble—
but equally, don't indulge
your \ Appetite to the full,
leave something in hand. \
If Paris saw Helen stuffing
herself to the eyeballs \
He'd detest her, he'd feel
her abduction had been \ A
stupid mistake. . . . \ Each
woman should know
herself, pick methods \ To
suit her body: one fashion .
won't do for all. \ Let the
girl with a pretty face lie
supine, let the lady \ Who
boasts a good back be
viewed \ From behind.
Milanion bore Atalanta's
legs on \ His shoulders:
nice legs should always be
used this way \ The petite
should ride a horse
(Andromache, Hector's
Theban \ Bride, was too
tall for these games: no
jockey she); \ If you 're
built like a fashion model,
with a willowy figure, \
Then kneel on the bed,
your neck \ A little arched;
the girl who has perfect legs
and bosom \ Should lie
sideways on, and make her
lover stand. \ Don't blush
to unbind your hair like
some ecstatic maenad \
And tumble long tresses
about \ Your uncurved
throat.
—OVID, THE ART OF LOVE,
TRANSLATED BY PETER GREEN
