Appear to Be an Object of Desire—Create Triangles • 199
When she saw that Rée was interested in her, she mentioned her desire to
meet Nietzsche. This inflamed Rée, and made him want to marry her and
to keep him for himself, but she insisted on meeting his friend. His letters
to Nietzsche betrayed his desire for this woman, and this in turn kindled
Nietzsche's own desire for her, even before he had met her. Every time one
of the two men was alone with her, the other was in the background.
Then, later on, most of the men who met her knew of the infamous
Nietzsche affair, and this only increased their desire to possess her, to com-
pete with Nietzsche's memory. Freud's affection for her, similarly, turned
into potent desire when he had to vie with Tausk for her attention. Salomé
was intelligent and attractive enough on her own account; but her constant
strategy of imposing a triangle of relationships on her suitors made her de-
sirability intense. And while they fought over her, she had the power, being
desired by all and subject to none.
Our desire for another person almost always involves social considera-
tions: we are attracted to those who are attractive to other people. We want
to possess them and steal them away. You can believe all the sentimental
nonsense you want to about desire, but in the end, much of it has to do
with vanity and greed. Do not whine and moralize about people's selfish-
ness, but simply use it to your advantage. The illusion that you are desired
by others will make you more attractive to your victims than your beautiful
face or your perfect body. And the most effective way to create that illusion
is to create a triangle: impose another person between you and your victim,
and subtly make your victim aware of how much this other person wants
you. The third point on the triangle does not have to be just one person:
surround yourself with admirers, reveal your past conquests—in other
words, envelop yourself in an aura of desirability. Make your targets com-
pete with your past and your present. They will long to possess you all to
themselves, giving you great power for as long as you elude their grasp. Fail
to make yourself an object of desire right from the start, and you will end
up the sorry slave to the whims of your lovers—they will abandon you the
moment they lose interest.
[A person] will desire any object so long as he is convinced
that it is desired by another person whom he admires.
—RENÉ GIRARD
Keys to Seduction
We are social creatures, and are immensely influenced by the tastes and
desires of other people. Imagine a large social gathering. You see a
man alone, whom nobody talks to for any length of time, and who is wan-
dering around without company; isn't there a kind of self-fulfilling isola-
tion about him? Why is he alone, why is he avoided? There has to be a
reason. Until someone takes pity on this man and starts up a conversationexample, put every care
and effort into winning this
man's love, squabbling over
it for a while as boys do
for cherries.
—BALDASSARE CASTIGLIONE,
THE BOOK OFTHE COURTIER,
TRANSLATED BY GEORGE BULL
Most of the time we prefer
one thing to another
because that is what our
friends already prefer or
because that object has
marked social significance.
Adults, when they are
hungry, are just like
children in that they seek
out the foods that others
take. In their love affairs,
they seek out the man or
woman whom others find
attractive and abandon
those who are not sought
after. When we say of a
man or woman that he or
she is desirable, what we
really mean is that others
desire them. It is not that
they have some particular
quality, but because they
conform to some currently
modish model.
—SERGE MOSCOVICI, THE AGE
OF THE CROWD:A HISTORICAL
TREATISE ON MASS PSYCHOL-
OGY, TRANSLATED BY J. C.
WHITEHOUSE
It will be greatly to your
advantage to entertain the
lady you would win with
an account of the number
of women who are in love
with you, and of the
decided advances which
they have made to you; for
this will not only prove
that you are a great favorite
with the ladies, and a man
of true honor, but it will
convince her that she may
have the honor of being
enrolled in the same list,
and of being praised in the
200 • The Art of Seduction
with him, he will look unwanted and unwantable. But over there, in an-
other corner, is a woman surrounded by people. They laugh at her remarks,
and as they laugh, others join the group, attracted by its gaiety. When she
moves around, people follow. Her face is glowing with attention. There has
to be a reason.
In both cases, of course, there doesn't actually have to be a reason at
all. The neglected man may have quite charming qualities, supposing you
ever talk to him; but most likely you won't. Desirability is a social illu-
sion. Its source is less what you say or do, or any kind of boasting or self-
advertisement, than the sense that other people desire you. To turn your
targets' interest into something deeper, into desire, you must make them
see you as a person whom others cherish and covet. Desire is both imitative
(we like what others like) and competitive (we want to take away from oth-
ers what they have). As children, we wanted to monopolize the attention of
a parent, to draw it away from other siblings. This sense of rivalry pervades
human desire, repeating throughout our lives. Make people compete for
your attention, make them see you as sought after by everyone else. The
aura of desirability will envelop you.
Your admirers can be friends or even suitors. Call it the harem effect.
Pauline Bonaparte, sister of Napoleon, raised her value in men's eyes by al-
ways having a group of worshipful men around her at balls and parties. If
she went for a walk, it was never with one man, always with two or three.
Perhaps these men were simply friends, or even just props and hangers-on;
the sight of them was enough to suggest that she was prized and desired, a
woman worth fighting over. Andy Warhol, too, surrounded himself with
the most glamorous, interesting people he could find. To be part of his in-
ner circle meant that you were desirable as well. By placing himself in the
middle but keeping himself aloof from it all, he made everyone compete
for his attention. He stirred people's desire to possess him by holding back.
Practices like these not only stimulate competitive desires, they take aim
at people's prime weakness: their vanity and self-esteem. We can endure
feeling that another person has more talent, or more money, but the sense
that a rival is more desirable than we are—that is unbearable. In the early
eighteenth century, the Duke de Richelieu, a great rake, managed to se-
duce a young woman who was rather religious but whose husband, a dolt,
was often away. He then proceeded to seduce her upstairs neighbor, a
young widow. When the two women discovered that he was going from
one to the other in the same night, they confronted him. A lesser man
would have fled, but not the duke; he understood the dynamic of vanity
and desire. Neither woman wanted to feel that he preferred the other. And
so he managed to arrange a little menage a trois, knowing that now they
would struggle between themselves to be the favorite. When people's vani-
ty is at risk, you can make them do whatever you want. According to
Stendhal, if there is a woman you are interested in, pay attention to her sis-
ter. That will stir a triangular desire.
Your reputation—your illustrious past as a seducer—is an effective waysame way, in the presence
of your other female
friends. This will greatly
delight her, and you need
not be surprised if she
testifies her admiration of
your character by throwing
her arms around your neck
on the spot.
—LOLA MONTEZ, THE ARTS
AND SECRETS OF BEAUTY, WITH
HINTS TO GENTLEMEN ON THE
ART OF FASCINATING
[René] Girard's mimetic
desire occurs when an
individual subject desires
an object because it is
desired by another subject,
here designated as the
rival: desire is modeled on
the wishes or actions of
another. Philippe Lacoue-
Labarthe says that "the
basic hypothesis upon
which rests Girard's famous
analysis [is that] every
desire is the desire of the
other (and not immediately
desire of an object), every
structure of desire is
triangular (including the
other—mediator or
model—whose desire desire
imitates), every desire is
thus from its inception
tapped by hatred and
rivalry; in short, the origin
of desire is mimesis—
mimeticism—and no
desire is ever forged which
does not desire forthwith
the death or disappearance
of the model or exemplary
character which gave rise
to it.
—JAMES MANDRELL,
DON JUAN AND THE POINT OF
HONOR
