438 • Appendix A: Seductive Environment/Seductive Time
show. Keep everything light and playful, full of distractions, noise, color,
and a bit of chaos. No weight, responsibilities, or judgments. A place to
lose yourself in.
3. In 1746, a seventeen-year-old girl named Cristina had come to the city
of Venice, Italy, with her uncle, a priest, in search of a husband. Cristina
was from a small village but had a substantial dowry to offer. The Venetian
men who were willing to marry her, however, did not please her. So after
two weeks of futile searching, she and her uncle prepared to return to their
village. They were seated in their gondola, about to leave the city, when
Cristina saw an elegantly dressed young man walking toward them.
"There's a handsome fellow!" she said to her uncle. "I wish he was in the
boat with us." The gentleman could not have heard this, yet he approached,
handed the gondolier some money, and sat down beside Cristina, much to
her delight. He introduced himself as Jacques Casanova. When the priest
complimented him on his friendly manners, Casanova replied, "Perhaps I
should not have been so friendly, my reverend father, if I had not been at-
tracted by the beauty of your niece."
Cristina told him why they had come to Venice and why they were
leaving. Casanova laughed and chided her—a man cannot decide to marry
a girl after seeing her for a few days. He must know more about her charac-
ter; it would take at least six months. He himself was looking for a wife,
and he explained to her why he had been as disappointed by the girls he
had met as she had been disappointed by the men. Casanova seemed to
have no destination; he simply accompanied them, entertaining Cristina
the whole way with witty conversation. When the gondola arrived at the
edge of Venice, Casanova hired a carriage to the nearby city of Treviso and
invited them to join him. From there they could catch a chaise to their vil-
lage. The uncle accepted, and on the way to their carriage, Casanova of-
fered his arm to Cristina. What would his mistress say if she saw them, she
asked. "I have no mistress," he answered, "and I shall never have one again,
for I shall never find such a pretty girl as you—no, not in Venice." His
words went to her head, filling it with all kinds of strange thoughts, and she
began to talk and act in a manner that was new to her, becoming almost
brazen. What a pity she could not stay in Venice for the six months he
needed to get to know a girl, she told Casanova. Without hesitation he of-
fered to pay her expenses in Venice for that period while he courted her.
On the carriage ride she turned this offer over in her mind, and once in
Treviso she got her uncle alone and begged him to return to the village by
himself, then come back for her in a few days. She was in love with
Casanova; she wanted to know him better; he was a perfect gentleman,
who could be trusted. The uncle agreed to do as she wished.
The following day Casanova never left her side. There was not the
slightest hint of disagreement in his nature. They spent the day wandering
around the city, shopping and talking. He took her to a play in the evening
Appendix A: Seductive Environment/Seductive Time • 439
and to the casino after that, supplying her with a domino and a mask. He
gave her money to gamble and she won. By the time the uncle returned to
Treviso, she had all but forgotten about her marriage plans—all she could
think of was the six months she would spend with Casanova. But she re-
turned to her village with her uncle and waited for Casanova to visit her.
He showed up a few weeks later, bringing with him a handsome young
man named Charles. Alone with Cristina, Casanova explained the situa-
tion: Charles was the most eligible bachelor in Venice, a man who would
make a much better husband than he would. Cristina admitted to Casanova
that she too had had her doubts. He was too exciting, had made her think
of other things besides marriage, things she was ashamed of. Perhaps it was
for the better. She thanked him for taking such pains to find her a husband.
Over the next few days Charles courted her, and they were married several
weeks later. The fantasy and allure of Casanova, however, remained in her
mind forever.
Casanova could not marry—it was against everything in his nature. But it
was also against his nature to force himself on a young girl. Better to leave
her with the perfect fantasy image than to ruin her life. Besides, he enjoyed
the courting and flirting more than anything else.
Casanova supplied a young woman with the ultimate fantasy. While he
was in her orbit he devoted every moment to her. He never mentioned
work, allowing no boring, mundane details to interrupt the fantasy. And he
added great theater. He wore the most spectacular outfits, full of sparkling
jewels. He led her to the most wonderful entertainments—carnivals,
masked balls, the casinos, journeys with no destination. He was the great
master at creating seductive time and environment.
Casanova is the model to aspire to. While in your presence your targets
must sense a change. Time has a different rhythm—they barely notice its
passing. They have the feeling that everything is stopping for them, just as
all normal activity comes to a halt at a festival. The idle pleasures you pro-
vide them are contagious—one leads to another and to another, until it is
too late to turn back.
