Use Physical Lures • 397
Onstage she made every man in the audience come alive, abandoning her-
self in dance. In person she was cooler, or slightly so. A man likes to feel
that a woman is enflamed not because she has an insatiable appetite but be-
cause of him; so Otero personalized her sexuality, using glances, a brushing
of skin, a more languorous tone of voice, a saucy comment, to suggest that
the man was heating her up. In her memoirs she revealed that Prince Albert
was a most inept lover. Yet he believed, along with many other men, that
with her he was Hercules himself. Her sexuality actually originated from
her, but she created the illusion that the man was the aggressor.
The key to luring the target into the final act of your seduction is not
to make it obvious, not to announce that you are ready (to pounce or be
pounced upon). Everything should be geared, not to the conscious mind,
but to the senses. You want your target to read cues not from your words or
actions but from your body. You must make your body glow with desire—
for the target. Your desire should be read in your eyes, in a trembling in
your voice, in your reaction when your bodies draw near.
You cannot train your body to act this way, but by choosing a victim
(see chapter 1) who has this effect on you, it will all flow naturally. During
the seduction, you will have had to hold yourself back, to intrigue and
frustrate the victim. You will have frustrated yourself in the process, and
will already be champing at the bit. Once you sense that the target has
fallen for you and cannot turn back, let those frustrated desires course
through your blood and warm you up. You do not need to touch your tar-
gets, or become physical. As La Belle Otero understood, sexual desire is
contagious. They will catch your heat and glow in return. Let them make
the first move. It will cover your tracks. The second and third moves are
yours.
Spell SEX with capital letters when you talk about Otero.
She exuded it.
—MAURICE CHEVALIER
Lowering Inhibitions
One day in 1931, in a village in New Guinea, a young girl named Tu-
perselai heard some happy news: her father, Allaman, who had left
some months before to work on a tobacco plantation, had returned for a
visit. Tuperselai ran to greet him. Accompanying her father was a white
man, an unusual sight in these parts. He was a twenty-two-year-old Aus-
tralian from Tasmania, and he was the owner of the plantation. His name
was Errol Flynn.
Flynn smiled warmly at Tuperselai, seeming particularly interested in
her bare breasts. (As was the custom in New Guinea then, she wore only a
grass skirt.) He said in pidgin English how beautiful she was, and kept re-
peating her name, which he pronounced remarkably well. He did not sayYou're anxiously expecting
me to escort you \ To
parties: here too solicit my
advice. \ Arrive late, when
the lamps are lit; make a
graceful entrance— \ Delay
enhances charm, delay's a
great bawd. \ Plain you
may be, but at night you'll
look fine to the tipsy: \
Soft lights and shadows
will mask your faults. \
Take your food with dainty
fingers: good table manners
matter: \ Don't besmear
your whole face with a
greasy paw. \ Don't cat
first at home, and nibble—
but equally, don't indulge
your \ Appetite to the full,
leave something in hand. \
If Paris saw Helen stuffing
herself to the eyeballs \
He'd detest her, he'd feel
her abduction had been \ A
stupid mistake. . . . \ Each
woman should know
herself, pick methods \ To
suit her body: one fashion .
won't do for all. \ Let the
girl with a pretty face lie
supine, let the lady \ Who
boasts a good back be
viewed \ From behind.
Milanion bore Atalanta's
legs on \ His shoulders:
nice legs should always be
used this way \ The petite
should ride a horse
(Andromache, Hector's
Theban \ Bride, was too
tall for these games: no
jockey she); \ If you 're
built like a fashion model,
with a willowy figure, \
Then kneel on the bed,
your neck \ A little arched;
the girl who has perfect legs
and bosom \ Should lie
sideways on, and make her
lover stand. \ Don't blush
to unbind your hair like
some ecstatic maenad \
And tumble long tresses
about \ Your uncurved
throat.
—OVID, THE ART OF LOVE,
TRANSLATED BY PETER GREEN
398 • The Art of Seduction
much else, mind you—he did not speak her language—so she said goodbye
and walked away with her father. But later that day she discovered, to her
dismay, that Mr. Flynn had taken a liking to her and had purchased her
from her father for two pigs, some English coins, and some seashell money.
The family was poor and the father liked the price. Tuperselai had a
boyfriend in the village whom she did not want to leave, but she did not
dare disobey her father, and she left with Mr. Flynn for the tobacco planta-
tion. On the other hand, she had no intention of being friendly with this
man, from whom she expected the worst kind of treatment.
In the first few days, Tuperselai missed her village terribly, and felt ner-
vous and out of sorts. But Mr. Flynn was polite, and talked in a soothing
voice. She began to relax, and since he kept his distance, she decided it was
safe to approach him. His white skin was tasty to the mosquitoes, so she be-
gan to wash him every night with scented bush herbs to keep them away.
Soon she had a thought: Mr. Flynn was lonely, and wanted a companion.
That was why he had bought her. At night he usually read; instead, she be-
gan to entertain him by singing and dancing. Sometimes he tried to com-
municate in words and gestures, struggling in pidgin. She had no idea what
he was trying to say, but he made her laugh. And one day she did under-
stand something: the word "swim." He was inviting her to go swimming
with him in the Laloki River. She was happy to go along, but the river was
full of crocodiles, so she brought along her spear just in case.
At the sight of the river, Mr. Flynn seemed to come alive—he tore off
his clothes and dove in. She followed and swam after him. He put his arms
around her and kissed her. They drifted downstream, and she clung to him.
She had forgotten about the crocodiles; she had also forgotten about her fa-
ther, her boyfriend, her village, and everything else there was to forget.
Around a bend of the river, he picked her up and carried her to a secluded
grove near the river's edge. It all happened rather suddenly, which was fine
with Tuperselai. From then on this was a daily ritual—the river, the
grove—until the time came when the tobacco plantation was no longer
doing so well, and Mr. Flynn left New Guinea.
One day some ten years later, a young girl named Blanca Rosa Welter
went to a party at the Ritz Hotel in Mexico City. As she wandered through
the bar, looking for her friends, a tall older man blocked her path and said
in a charming accent, "You must be Blanca Rosa." He did not have to in-
troduce himself—he was the famous Hollywood actor Errol Flynn. His
face was plastered on posters everywhere, and he was friends of the party's
hosts, the Davises, and had heard them praise the beauty of Blanca Rosa,
who was turning eighteen the following day. He led her to a table in the
corner. His manner was graceful and confident, and listening to him talk,
she forgot about her friends. He spoke of her beauty, repeated her name,
said he could make her a star. Before she knew what was happening, he had
invited her to join him in Acapulco, where he was vacationing. The
Davises, their mutual friends, could come along as chaperones. That would
be wonderful, she said, but her mother would never agree. Don't worry"How do you attract a
man," the Paris
correspondent of the
Stockholm Aftonbladet
asked La Belle on July 3,
1910. • "Make yourself
as feminine as possible;
dress so that the most
interesting portions of your
anatomy are emphasized;
and subtly allow the
gentleman to know you are
willing to yield at the
proper time. . . ." • "The
way to hold a man" Otero
revealed a little later to a
staff writer from the
Johannesburg Morning
Journal, "is to keep acting
as though every time you
meet him you are overcome
with fresh enthusiasm and,
with barely restrained
eagerness, you await his
impetuosity."
—ARTHUR H. LEWIS,
LA BELLE OTERO
"I missed the mental
stimulation when I was
younger," he answered.
"But from the time I began
to have women, shall we
say, on the assembly-line
basis, I discovered that the
only thing you need, want,
or should have is the
absolutely physical. Simply
the physical. No mind at
all. A woman's mind will
get in the way." • "Really?"
• "For me . . . I am
speaking of myself. I don't
speak for male humankind.
I am speaking for what I've
discovered or what I need:
the body, the face, the
physical motion, the voice,
the femaleness, the female
presence . . . totally that,
nothing else. That's the
best. There's no
possessiveness in that."
• I watched him closely. •
"I'm serious," he said.
"That's my view and
feeling. Just the elementary
