Effect a Regression • 343
oedipal regression. Look for those who, like Professor Mut, seem outwardly
the most adult—straitlaced, serious, a little full of themselves. They are
struggling to repress their regressive tendencies, overcompensating for their
weaknesses. Often those who seem the most in command of themselves are
the ripest for regression. In fact they are secretly longing for it, because their
power, position, and responsibilities are more a burden than a pleasure.
3. Born in 1768, the French writer François René de Chateaubriand grew
up in a medieval castle in Brittany. The castle was cold and gloomy, as if in-
habited by the ghosts of its past. The family lived there in semiseclusion.
Chateaubriand spent much of his time with his sister Lucile, and his attach-
ment to her was strong enough that rumors of incest made the rounds. But
when he was around fifteen, a new woman named Sylphide entered his
life—a woman he created in his imagination, a composite of all the hero-
ines, goddesses, and courtesans he had read about in books. He was con-
stantly seeing her features in his mind, and hearing her voice. Soon she was
taking walks with him, carrying on conversations. He imagined her inno-
cent and exalted, yet they would sometimes do things that were not so in-
nocent. He carried on this relationship for two whole years, until finally he
left for Paris, and replaced Sylphide with women of flesh and blood.
The French public, weary after the terrors of the 1790s, greeted
Chateaubriand's first books enthusiastically, sensing a new spirit in them.
His novels were full of windswept castles, brooding heroes, and passionate
heroines. Romanticism was in the air. Chateaubriand himself resembled
the characters in his novels, and despite his rather unattractive appearance,
women went wild over him—with him, they could escape their boring
marriages and live out the kind of turbulent romance he wrote about.
Chateaubriand's nickname was the Enchanter, and although he was mar-
ried, and an ardent Catholic, the number of his affairs increased with the
years. But he had a restless nature—he traveled to the Middle East, to the
United States, all over Europe. He could not find what he was looking for
anywhere, and not the right woman either: after the novelty of an affair
wore off, he would leave. By 1807 he had had so many affairs, and still felt
so unsatisfied, that he decided to retire to his country estate, called Vallée
aux Loups. He filled the place with trees from all over the world, trans-
forming the grounds into something out of one of his novels. There he
began to write the memoirs that he envisioned would be his masterpiece.
By 1817, however, Chateaubriand's life had fallen apart. Money prob-
lems had forced him to sell Vallée aux Loups. Almost fifty, he suddenly felt
old, his inspiration dried up. That year he visited the writer Madame de
Staël, who had been ill and was now close to death. He spent several days at
her bedside, along with her closest friend, Juliette Récamier. Madame Ré-
camier's affairs were infamous. She was married to a much older man, but
they had not lived together for some time; she had broken the hearts of the
most illustrious men in Europe, including Prince Metternich, the Duke of
344 • The Art of Seduction
Wellington, and the writer Benjamin Constant. It had also been rumored
that despite all her flirtations she was still a virgin. She was now almost
forty, but she was the type of woman who seems youthful at any age.
Drawn together by their grief over de Staël's death, she and Chateaubriand
became friends. She listened so attentively to him, adopting his moods and
echoing his sentiments, that he felt that he had at last met a woman who
understood him. There was also something rather ethereal about Madame
Récamier. Her walk, her voice, her eyes—more than one man had com-
pared her to some unearthly angel. Chateaubriand soon burned with the
desire to possess her physically.
The year after their friendship began, she had a surprise for him: she
had convinced a friend to purchase Vallée aux Loups. The friend was away
for a few weeks, and she invited Chateaubriand to spend some time with
her at his former estate. He happily accepted. He showed her around, ex-
plaining what each little patch of ground had meant to him, the memories
the place conjured up. He felt youthful feelings welling up inside him, feel-
ings he had forgotten about. He delved further into the past, describing
events in his childhood. At moments, walking with Madame Récamier and
looking into those kind eyes, he felt a shiver of recognition, but he could
not quite identify it. All he knew was that he had to go back to the mem-
oirs that he had laid aside. "I intend to employ the little time that is left to
me in describing my youth," he said, "so long as its essence remains palpa-
ble to me."
It seemed that Madame Récamier returned Chateaubriand's love, but as
usual she struggled to keep it a spiritual affair. The Enchanter, however,
deserved his nickname. His poetry, his air of melancholy, and his persis-
tence finally won the day and she succumbed, perhaps for the first time in
her life. Now, as lovers, they were inseparable. But as always with Cha-
teaubriand, over time one woman was not enough. The restless spirit
returned. He began to have affairs again. Soon he and Récamier stopped
seeing each other.
In 1832, Chateaubriand was traveling through Switzerland. Once again
his life had taken a downward turn; only this time he truly was old, in body
and spirit. In the Alps, strange thoughts of his youth began to assail him,
memories of the castle in Brittany. Word reached him that Madame Ré-
camier was in the area. He had not seen her in years, and he hurried to the
inn where she was staying. She was as kind to him as ever; during the day
they took walks together, and at night they stayed up late, talking.
One day, Chateaubriand told Récamier he had finally decided to finish
his memoirs. And he had a confession to make: he told her the story of
Sylphide, his imaginary lover when he was growing up. He had once
hoped to meet a Sylphide in real life, but the women he had known had
paled in comparison. Over the years he had forgotten about his imaginary
lover, but now he was an old man, and he not only thought of her again,
he could see her face and hear her voice. And with those memories he real-
ized that he had in fact met Sylphide in real life—it was Madame Ré-
