The Fetishistic Star
One day in 1922, in Berlin, Germany, a casting call went out for the
part of a voluptuous young woman in a film called Tragedy of Love. Of
the hundreds of struggling young actresses who showed up, most would do
anything to get the casting director's attention, including exposing them-
selves. There was one young woman in the line, however, who was simply
dressed, and performed none of the other girls' desperate antics. Yet she
stood out anyway.
The girl carried a puppy on a leash, and had draped an elegant necklace
around the puppy's neck. The casting director noticed her immediately. He
watched her as she stood in line, calmly holding the dog in her arms and
keeping to herself. When she smoked a cigarette, her gestures were slow
and suggestive. He was fascinated by her legs and face, the sinuous way she
moved, the hint of coldness in her eyes. By the time she had come to the
front, he had already cast her. Her name was Marlene Dietrich.
By 1929, when the Austrian-American director Josef von Sternberg ar-
rived in Berlin to begin work on the film The Blue Angel, the twenty-
seven-year-old Dietrich was well known in the Berlin film and theater
world. The Blue Angel was to be about a woman called Lola-Lola who preys
sadistically on men, and all of Berlin's best actresses wanted the part—except,
apparently, Dietrich, who made it known that she thought the role demean-
ing; von Sternberg should choose from the other actresses he had in mind.
Shortly after arriving in Berlin, however, von Sternberg attended a perfor-
mance of a musical to watch a male actor he was considering for The Blue
Angel The star of the musical was Dietrich, and as soon as she came on-
stage, von Sternberg found that he could not take his eyes off her. She
stared at him directly, insolently, like a man; and then there were those legs,
and the way she leaned provocatively against the wall. Von Sternberg forgot
about the actor he had come to see. He had found his Lola-Lola.
Von Sternberg managed to convince Dietrich to take the part, and im-
mediately he went to work, molding her into the Lola of his imagination.
He changed her hair, drew a silver line down her nose to make it seem
thinner, taught her to look at the camera with the insolence he had seen
onstage. When filming began, he created a lighting system just for her—a
light that tracked her wherever she went, and was strategically heightened
by gauze and smoke. Obsessed with his "creation," he followed her every-
where. No one else could go near her.The cool, bright face which
didn't ask for anything,
which simply existed,
waiting—it was an empty
face, he thought; a face that
could change with any
wind of expression. One
could dream into it
anything. It was like a
beautiful empty house
waiting for carpets and
pictures. It had all
possibilities—it could
become a palace or a
brothel. It depended on the
one who filled it. How
limited by comparison was
all that was already
completed and labeled.
—ERICH MARIA REMARQUE,
ON MARLENE DIETRICH,
ARCH OF TRIUMPH
Marlene Dietrich is not an
actress, like Sarah
Bernhardt; she is a myth,
like Phryne.
—ANDRÉ: MALRAUX, QUOTED IN
EDGAR MORIN, THE STARS,
TRANSLATED BY RICHARD
HOWARD
When Pygmalion saw
these women, living such
wicked lives, he was
121
122 • The Art of Seduction
The Blue Angel was a huge success in Germany. Audiences were fasci-
nated with Dietrich: that cold, brutal stare as she spread her legs over a
stool, baring her underwear; her effortless way of commanding attention
on screen. Others besides von Sternberg became obsessed with her. A man
dying of cancer, Count Sascha Kolowrat, had one last wish: to see Mar-
lene's legs in person. Dietrich obliged, visiting him in the hospital and lift-
ing up her skirt; he sighed and said "Thank you. Now I can die happy."
Soon Paramount Studios brought Dietrich to Hollywood, where everyone
was quickly talking about her. At a party, all eyes would turn toward her
when she came into the room. She would be escorted by the most hand-
some men in Hollywood, and would be wearing an outfit both beautiful
and unusual—gold-lame pajamas, a sailor suit with a yachting cap. The
next day the look would be copied by women all over town; next it would
spread to magazines, and a whole new trend would start.
The real object of fascination, however, was unquestionably Dietrich's
face. What had enthralled von Sternberg was her blankness—with a simple
lighting trick he could make that face do whatever he wanted. Dietrich
eventually stopped working with von Sternberg, but never forgot what he
had taught her. One night in 1951, the director Fritz Lang, who was about
to direct her in the film Rancho Notorious, was driving past his office when
he saw a light flash in the window. Fearing a burglary, he got out of his car,
crept up the stairs, and peeked through the crack in the door: it was Diet-
rich taking pictures of herself in the mirror, studying her face from every
angle.
Marlene Dietrich had a distance from her own self: she could study her
face, her legs, her body, as if she were someone else. This gave her the
ability to mold her look, transforming her appearance for effect. She could
pose in just the way that would most excite a man, her blankness letting
him see her according to his fantasy, whether of sadism, voluptuousness, or
danger. And every man who met her, or who watched her on screen, fan-
tasized endlessly about her. The effect worked on women as well; in the
words of one writer, she projected "sex without gender." But this self-
distance gave her a certain coldness, whether on film or in person. She was
like a beautiful object, something to fetishize and admire the way we ad-
mire a work of art.
The fetish is an object that commands an emotional response and that
makes us breathe life into it. Because it is an object we can imagine what-
ever we want to about it. Most people are too moody, complex, and reac-
tive to let us see them as objects that we can fetishize. The power of the
Fetishistic Star comes from an ability to become an object, and not just any
object but an object we fetishize, one that stimulates a variety of fantasies.
Fetishistic Stars are perfect, like the statue of a Greek god or goddess. The
effect is startling, and seductive. Its principal requirement is self-distance. If
you see yourself as an object, then others will too. An ethereal, dreamlike
air will heighten the effect.revolted by the many faults
which nature has
implanted in the female
sex, and long lived a
bachelor existence, without
any wife to share his home.
But meanwhile, with
marvelous artistry, he
skillfully carved a snowy
ivory statue. He made it
lovelier than any woman
born, and fell in love with
his own creation. The
statue had all the
appearance of a real girl, so
that it seemed to be alive,
to want to move, did not
modesty forbid. So cleverly
did his art conceal its art.
Pygmalion gazed in
wonder, and in his heart
there rose a passionate love
for this image of a human
form. Often he ran his
hands over the work,
feeling it to see whether it
was flesh or ivory, and
would not yet admit that
ivory was all it was. He
kissed the statue, and
imagined that it kissed him
back, spoke to it and
embraced it, and thought
he felt his fingers sink into
the limbs he touched, so
that he was afraid lest a
bruise appear where he had
pressed the flesh.
Sometimes he addressed it
in flattering speeches,
sometimes brought the kind
of presents that girls
enjoy. . . . He dressed the
limbs of his statue in
woman's robes, and put
rings on its fingers, long
necklaces round its
neck. . . . All this finery
became the image well, but
it was no less lovely
unadorned. Pygmalion
then placed the statue on a
couch that was covered with
cloths of Tynan purple,
laid its head to rest on soft
down pillows, as if it could
appreciate them, and called
it his bedfellow. • The
festival of Venus, which is
celebrated with the greatest
