The Indulgent Strategy
In October of 1961, the American journalist Cindy Adams was granted
an exclusive interview with President Sukarno of Indonesia. It was a re-
markable coup, for Adams was a little-known journalist at the time, while
Sukarno was a world figure in the midst of a crisis. A leader of the fight for
Indonesia's independence, he had been the country's president since 1949,
when the Dutch finally gave up the colony. By the early 1960s, his daring
foreign policy had made him hated in the United States, some calling him
the Hitler of Asia.
Adams decided that in the interests of a lively interview, she would not
be cowed or overawed by Sukarno, and she began the conversation by jok-
ing with him. To her pleasant surprise, her ice-breaking tactic seemed to
work: Sukarno warmed up to her. He let the interview run well over an
hour, and when it was over he loaded her with gifts. Her success was re-
markable enough, but even more so were the friendly letters she began
to receive from Sukarno after she and her husband had returned to New
York. A few years later, he proposed that she collaborate with him on his
autobiography.
Adams, who was used to doing puff pieces on third-rate celebrities, was
confused. She knew Sukarno had a reputation as a devilish Don Juan—le
grand seducteur, the French called him. He had had four wives and hundreds
of conquests. He was handsome, and obviously he was attracted to her, but
why choose her for this prestigious task? Perhaps his libido was too power-
ful for him to care about such things. Nevertheless, it was an offer she could
not refuse.
In January of 1964, Adams returned to Indonesia. Her strategy, she had
decided, would stay the same: she would be the brassy, straight-talking lady
who had seemed to charm Sukarno three years earlier. During her first in-
terview with him for the book, she complained in rather strong terms
about the rooms she had been given as lodgings. As if he were her secre-
tary, she dictated a letter to him, which he was to sign, detailing the special
treatment she was to be given by one and all. To her amazement, he duti-
fully copied out the letter, and signed it.
Next on Adams's schedule was a tour of Indonesia to interview people
who had known Sukarno in his youth. So she complained to him about the
plane she had to fly on, which she said was unsafe. "I tell you what, honey,"
she told him, "I think you should give me my own plane." "Okay," he an-You're anxious to keep
your mistress? \ Convince
her she's knocked you all of
a heap \ With her stunning
looks. If it's purple she's
wearing, praise purple; \
When she's in a silk dress,
say silk \ Suits her best of
all. . . Admire \ Her
singing voice, her gestures
as she dances, \ Cry
"Encore!" when she stops.
You can even praise \ Her
performance in bed, her
talent for love-making— \
Spell out what turned you
on. \ Though she may
show fiercer in action than
any Medusa, \ Her lover
will always describe her as
kind \ And gentle. But
take care not to give
yourself away while \
Making such tongue-in-
cheek compliments, don't
allow \ Your expression to
ruin the message. Art's
most effective \ When
concealed. Detection
discredits you for good.
—OVID, THE ART OF LOVE,
TRANSLATED BY PETER GREEN
The little boy (or girl) seeks
to fascinate his or her
parents. In Oriental
literature, imitation is
221
222 • The Art of Seduction
swered, apparently somewhat abashed. One, however, was not enough, she
went on; she required several planes, and a helicopter, and her own per-
sonal pilot, a good one. He agreed to everything. The leader of Indonesia
seemed to be not just intimidated by Adams but totally under her spell. He
praised her intelligence and wit. At one point he confided, "Do you know
why I'm doing this biography? . . . Only because of you, that's why." He
paid attention to her clothes, complimenting her outfits, noticing any
change in them. He was more like a fawning suitor than the "Hitler of
Asia."
Inevitably, of course, he made passes at her. She was an attractive
woman. First there was the hand on top of her hand, then a stolen kiss. She
spurned him every time, making it clear she was happily married, but she
was worried: if all he had wanted was an affair, the whole book deal could
fall apart. Once again, though, her straightforward strategy seemed the
right one. Surprisingly, he backed down without anger or resentment. He
promised that his affection for her would remain platonic. She had to admit
that he was not at all what she had expected, or what had been described to
her. Perhaps he liked being dominated by a woman.
The interviews continued for several months, and she noticed slight
changes in him. She still addressed him familiarly, spicing the conversation
with brazen comments, but now he returned them, delighting in this kind
of saucy banter. He assumed the same lively mood that she strategically
forced on herself. At first he had dressed in military uniform, or in his Ital-
ian suits. Now he dressed casually, even going barefoot, conforming to the
casual style of their relationship. One night he remarked that he liked the
color of her hair. It was Clairol, blue-black, she explained. He wanted to
have the same color; she had to bring him a bottle. She did as he asked,
imagining he was joking, but a few days later he requested her presence at
the palace to dye his hair for him. She did so, and now they had the exact
same hair color.
The book, Sukarno: An Autobiography as Told to Cindy Adams, was pub-
lished in 1965. To American readers' surprise, Sukarno came across as re-
markably charming and lovable, which was indeed how Adams described
him to one and all. If anyone argued, she would say that they did not know
him the way she did. Sukarno was well pleased, and had the book distrib-
uted far and wide. It helped gain sympathy for him in Indonesia, where he
was now being threatened with a military coup. And Sukarno was not
surprised—he had known all along that Adams would do a far better job
with his memoirs than any "serious" journalist.
Interpretation. Who was seducing whom? It was Sukarno who was doing
the seducing, and his seduction of Adams followed a classical sequence.
First, he chose the right victim. An experienced journalist would have re-
sisted the lure of a personal relationship with the subject, and a man would
have been less susceptible to his charm. And so he picked a woman, andreckoned to be one of the
ways of attracting. The
Sanskrit texts, for
example, give an important
part to the trick of the
woman copying the dress,
expressions, and speech of
her beloved. This kind of
mimetic drama is urged on
the woman who, "being
unable to unite with her
beloved, imitates him to
distract his thoughts." •
The child too, using the
devices of imitating
attitudes, dress, and so on,
seeks to fascinate, until a
magical intention, the
father or mother and thus
to "distract its thoughts."
Identification means that
one is abandoning and not
abandoning amorous
desires. It is a lure which
the child uses to capture his
parents and which, it must
be admitted, they fall for.
The same is true for the
masses, who imitate their
leader, bear his name and
repeat his gestures. They
bow to him, but at the
same time they are
unconsciously baiting a trap
to hold him. Great
ceremonies and
demonstrations are just as
much occasions when the
multitudes charm the
leader as vice versa.
—SERGE MOSCOVICI, THE AGE
OF THE CROWD, TRANSLATED BY
J. C.WHITEHOUSE
My sixth brother, he who
had both his lips cut off,
Prince of the Faithful, is
called Shakashik. • In his
youth he was very poor.
One day, as he was
begging in the streets of
Baghdad, he passed by a
splendid mansion, at the
gates of which stood an
impressive array of
attendants. Upon inquiry
my brother was informed
