Give Them Space to Fall—The Pursuer Is Pursued • 389
ferent. The target is falling for you now, and your retreat will lead to pan-
icky thoughts: you are losing interest, it is somehow my fault, perhaps it is
something I have done. Rather than think you are rejecting them on your
own, your targets will want to make this interpretation, since if the cause of
the problem is something they have done, they have the power to win you
back by changing their behavior. If you are simply rejecting them, on the
other hand, they have no control. People always want to preserve hope.
Now they will come to you, turn aggressive, thinking that will do the trick.
They will raise the erotic temperature. Understand: a person's willpower is
directly linked to their libido, their erotic desire. When your victims are
passively waiting for you, their erotic level is low. When they turn pursuer,
getting involved in the process, brimming with tension and anxiety, the
temperature is raised. So raise it as high as you can.
When you withdraw, make it subtle; you are instilling unease. Your
coldness or distance should dawn on your targets when they are alone, in
the form of a poisonous doubt creeping into their mind. Their paranoia
will become self-generating. Your subtle step back will make them want to
possess you, so they will willingly advance into your arms without being
pushed. This is different from the strategy in chapter 20, in which you are
inflicting deep wounds, creating a pattern of pain and pleasure. There the
goal is to make your victims weak and dependent, here it is to make them
active and aggressive. Which strategy you prefer to use (the two cannot be
combined) depends on what you want and the proclivities of your victim.
In Søren Kierkegaard's The Seducer's Diary, Johannes aims to seduce the
young and beautiful Cordelia. He begins by being rather intellectual with
her, and slowly intriguing her. Then he sends her letters that are romantic
and seductive. Now her fascination blossoms into love. Although in person
he remains a little distant, she senses in him great depths and is certain that
he loves her. Then one day, while they're talking, Cordelia has a strange
sensation: something about him is different. He seems more interested in
ideas than in her. Over the next few days, this doubt gets stronger—the let-
ters are a little less romantic, something is missing. Feeling anxious, she
slowly turns aggressive, becomes the pursuer instead of the pursued. The
seduction is now much more exciting, at least for Johannes.
Johannes's step back is subtle; he merely gives Cordelia the impression
that his interest is a little less romantic than the day before. He returns to
being the intellectual. This stirs the worrisome thought that her natural
charms and beauty no longer have as much effect on him. She must try
harder, provoke him sexually, prove to herself that she has some power over
him. She is now brimming with erotic desire, brought to that point by Jo-
hannes's subtle withdrawal of affection.
Each gender has its own seductive lures, which come naturally to them.
When you seem interested in someone but do not respond sexually, it is
disturbing, and presents a challenge: they will find a way to seduce you. To
produce this effect, first reveal an interest in your targets, through letters or
subtle insinuation. But when you are in their presence, assume a kind ofcoped with than an
earthquake. . . . • The
child who experiences his
mother's dissatisfaction and
apparent withdrawal of
affection reacts to this
menace at first with fear. He
tries to regain what seems
lost by expressing hostility
and aggressiveness. . . .
The change of its character
comes about only after
failure; when the child
realizes that the effort is a
failure. And now
something very strange
takes place, something
which is foreign to our
conscious thinking but
which is very near to the
infantile way. Instead of
grasping the object directly
and taking possession of it
in an aggressive way, the
child identifies with the
object as it was before. The
child does the same that
the mother did to him in
that happy time which has
passed. The process is very
illuminating because it
shapes the pattern of love
in general. The little boy
thus demonstrates in his
own behavior what he
wants his mother to do to
him, how she should
behave to him. He
announces this wish by
displaying his tenderness
and affection toward his
mother who gave these
before to him. It is an
attempt to overcome the
despair and sense of loss in
taking over the role of the
mother. The boy tries to
demonstrate what he
wishes by doing it himself:
look, I would like you to
act thus toward me, to be
thus tender and loving to
me. Of course this attitude
is not the result of
consideration or reasoned
planning but an emotional
process by identification, a
natural exchange of roles
with the unconscious aim
390 • The Art of Seduction
sexless neutrality. Be friendly, even warm, but no more. You are pushing
them into arming themselves with the seductive charms that are natural to
their sex—exactly what you want.
In the latter stages of the seduction, let your targets feel that you are be-
coming interested in another person—this is another form of taking a step
back. When Napoleon Bonaparte first met the young widow Josephine de
Beauharnais in 1795, he was excited by her exotic beauty and the looks she
gave him. He began to attend her weekly soirees and, to his delight, she
would ignore the other men and remain at his side, listening to him so at-
tentively. He found himself falling in love with Josephine, and had every
reason to believe she felt the same.
Then, at one soiree, she was friendly and attentive, as usual—except
that she was equally friendly to another man there, a former aristocrat, like
Josephine, the kind of man that Napoleon could never compete with when
it came to manners and wit. Doubts and jealousies began to stir within. As
a military man, he knew the value of going on the offensive, and after a few
weeks of a swift and aggressive campaign he had her all to himself, eventu-
ally marrying her. Of course Josephine, a clever seductress, had set it all up.
She did not say she was interested in another man, but his mere presence
at her house, a look here and there, subtle gestures, made it seem that way.
There is no more powerful way to hint that you are losing your desire. Make
your interest in another too obvious, though, and it could backfire. This is
not the situation in which you want to seem cruel; doubt and anxiety
are the effects you are after. Make your possible interest in another barely
perceptible to the naked eye.
Once someone has fallen for you, any physical absence will create un-
ease. You are literally creating space. The Russian seductress Lou Andreas-
Salomé had an intense presence; when a man was with her, he felt her eyes
boring into him, and often became entranced with her coquettish ways and
spirit. But then, almost invariably, something would come up—she would
have to leave town for a while, or would be too busy to see him. It was
during her absences that men fell hopelessly in love with her, and vowed to
be more aggressive next time they were with her. Your absences at this
latter point of the seduction should seem at least somewhat justified. You
are insinuating not a blatant brush-off but a slight doubt: perhaps you
could have found some reason to stay, perhaps you are losing interest, per-
haps there is someone else. In your absence, their appreciation of you will
grow. They will forget your faults, forgive your sins. The moment you re-
turn, they will chase after you as you desire. It will be as if you had come
back from the dead.
According to the psychologist Theodor Reik, we learn to love only
through rejection. As infants, we are showered with love by our mother—
we know nothing else. But when we get a little older, we begin to sense
that her love is not unconditional. If we do not behave, if we do not please
her, she can withdraw it. The idea that she will withdraw her affection fills
us with anxiety, and, at first, with anger—we will show her, we will throwof seducing the mother into
fulfilling his wish. He
demonstrates by his own
actions how he wants to be
loved. It is a primitive
presentation through
reversal, an example of
how to do the thing which
he wishes done by her. In
this presentation lives the
memory of the attentions,
tendernesses, and
endearments once received
from the mother or
loving persons.
—THEODOR REIK,
OF LOVE AND LUST
