338 • The Art of Seduction
ideals around with us, buried just below the surface. We are secretly disap-
pointed in how much we have had to compromise, how far below the ideal
we have fallen as we have gotten older. Make your targets feel they are liv-
ing out this youthful ideal, and coming closer to being the person they
wanted to be, and you will effect a different kind of regression, creating
a feeling reminiscent of adolescence. The relationship between you and
the seduced is in this instance more equal than in the previous kinds of
regressions—more like the affection between siblings. In fact the ideal is
often modeled on a brother or sister. To create this effect, strive to repro-
duce the intense, innocent mood of a youthful infatuation.
The Reverse Parental Regression. Here you are the one to regress: you
deliberately play the role of the cute, adorable, yet also sexually charged
child. Older people always find younger people incredibly seductive. In the
presence of youth, they feel a little of their own youth return; but they are
in fact older, and mixed into the invigoration they feel in young people's
company is the pleasure of playing the mother or father to them. If a child
has erotic feelings toward a parent, feelings that are quickly repressed, the
parent must deal with the same problem in reverse. Assume the role of the
child in relation to your targets, however, and they get to act out some of
those repressed erotic sentiments. The strategy may seem to call for a differ-
ence in age, but this is actually not critical. Marilyn Monroe's exaggerated
little-girl qualities worked just fine on men her age. Emphasizing a weak-
ness or vulnerability on your part will give the target a chance to play the
protector.
Some Examples
1. The parents of Victor Hugo separated shortly after the novelist was
born, in 1802. Hugo's mother, Sophie, had been carrying on an affair with
her husband's superior officer, a general. She took the three Hugo boys
away from their father and went off to Paris to raise them on her own.
Now the boys led a tumultuous life, featuring bouts of poverty, frequent
moves, and their mother's continued affair with the general. Of all the
boys, Victor was the most attached to his mother, adopting all her ideas and
pet peeves, particularly her hatred of his father. But with all the turmoil in
his childhood he never felt he got enough love and attention from the
mother he adored. When she died, in 1821, poor and debt-ridden, he was
devastated.
The following year Hugo married his childhood sweetheart, Adèle,
who physically resembled his mother. It was a happy marriage for a while,
but soon Adèle came to resemble his mother in more ways than one: in
1832, he discovered that she was having an affair with the French literary
critic Sainte-Beuve, who also happened to be Hugo's best friend at the
Effect a Regression • 339
time. Hugo was a celebrated writer by now, but he was not the calculating
type. He generally wore his heart on his sleeve. Yet he could not confide in
anyone about Adèle's affair; it was too humiliating. His only solution was to
have affairs of his own, with actresses, courtesans, married women. Hugo
had a prodigious appetite, sometimes visiting three different women in the
same day.
Near the end of 1832, production began on one of Hugo's plays, and
he was to supervise the casting. A twenty-six-year-old actress named Juli-
ette Drouet auditioned for one of the smaller roles. Normally quite adroit
with the ladies, Hugo found himself stuttering in Juliette's presence. She
was quite simply the most beautiful woman he had ever seen, and this and
her composed manner intimidated him. Naturally, Juliette won the part.
He found himself thinking about her all the time. She always seemed to be
surrounded by a group of adoring men. Clearly she was not interested in
him, or so he thought. One evening, though, after a performance of the play,
he followed her home, to find that she was neither angry nor surprised—
indeed she invited him up to her apartment. He spent the night, and soon
he was spending almost every night there.
Hugo was happy again. To his delight, Juliette quit her career in the
theater, dropped her former friends, and learned to cook. She had loved
fancy clothes and social affairs; now she became Hugo's secretary, rarely
leaving the apartment in which he had established her and seeming to live
only for his visits. After a while, however, Hugo returned to his old ways
and started to have little affairs on the side. She did not complain—as long
as she remained the one woman he kept returning to. And Hugo had in
fact grown quite dependent on her.
In 1843, Hugo's beloved daughter died in an accident and he sank into
a depression. The only way he knew to get over his grief was to have an af-
fair with someone new. And so, shortly thereafter, he fell in love with a
young married aristocrat named Léonie d'Aunet. He began to see Juliette
less and less. A few years later, Léonie, feeling certain she was the preferred
one, gave him an ultimatum: stop seeing Juliette altogether, or it was over.
Hugo refused. Instead he decided to stage a contest: he would continue to
see both women, and in a few months his heart would tell him which one
he preferred. Léonie was furious, but she had no choice. Her affair with
Hugo had already ruined her marriage and her standing in society; she was
dependent on him. Anyway, how could she lose—she was in the prime of
life, whereas Juliette had gray hair by now. So she pretended to go along
with this contest, but as time went on, she grew increasingly resentful about
it, and complained. Juliette, on the other hand, behaved as if nothing had
changed. Whenever he visited, she treated him as she always had, dropping
everything to comfort and mother him.
The contest lasted several years. In 1851, Hugo was in trouble with
Louis-Napoleon, the cousin of Napoleon Bonaparte and now the president
of France. Hugo had attacked his dictatorial tendencies in the press, bitterly
and perhaps recklessly, for Louis-Napoleon was a vengeful man. Fearing for
