The Charmer • 85
In 1876, Disraeli steered through Parliament a bill declaring Queen
Victoria a "Queen-Empress." The queen was beside herself with joy. Out
of gratitude and certainly love, she elevated this Jewish dandy and novelist
to the peerage, making him Earl of Beaconsfield, the realization of a life-
long dream.
Disraeli knew how deceptive appearances can be: people were always judg-
ing him by his face and by his clothes, and he had learned never to do
the same to them. So he was not deceived by Queen Victoria's dour, sober
exterior. Beneath it, he sensed, was a woman who yearned for a man to
appeal to her feminine side, a woman who was affectionate, warm, even
sexual. The extent to which this side of Victoria had been repressed merely
revealed the strength of the feelings he would stir once he melted her
reserve.
Disraeli's approach was to appeal to two aspects of Victoria's personality
that other people had squashed: her confidence and her sexuality. He was a
master at flattering a person's ego. As one English princess remarked,
"When I left the dining room after sitting next to Mr. Gladstone, I thought
he was the cleverest man in England. But after sitting next to Mr. Disraeli, I
thought I was the cleverest woman in England." Disraeli worked his magic
with a delicate touch, insinuating an atmosphere of amusement and relax-
ation, particularly in relation to politics. Once the queen's guard was down,
he made that mood a little warmer, a little more suggestive, subtly sexual—
though of course without overt flirtation. Disraeli made Victoria feel desir-
able as a woman and gifted as a monarch. How could she resist? How could
she deny him anything?
Our personalities are often molded by how we are treated: if a parent or
spouse is defensive or argumentative in dealing with us, we tend to respond
the same way. Never mistake people's exterior characteristics for reality, for
the character they show on the surface may be merely a reflection of the
people with whom they have been most in contact, or a front disguising
its own opposite. A gruff exterior may hide a person dying for warmth; a
repressed, sober-looking type may actually be struggling to conceal uncon-
trollable emotions. That is the key to charm—feeding what has been
repressed or denied.
By indulging the queen, by making himself a source of pleasure, Dis-
raeli was able to soften a woman who had grown hard and cantankerous.
Indulgence is a powerful tool of seduction: it is hard to be angry or defen-
sive with someone who seems to agree with your opinions and tastes.
Charmers may appear to be weaker than their targets but in the end they
are the more powerful side because they have stolen the ability to resist.
2. In 1971, the American financier and Democratic Party power-player
Averell Harriman saw his life drawing to a close. He was seventy-nine, his
wife of many years, Marie, had just died, and with the Democrats out
86 • The Art of Seduction
of office his political career seemed over. Feeling old and depressed, he
resigned himself to spending his last years with his grandchildren in quiet
retirement.
A few months after Marie's death, Harriman was talked into attending a
Washington party. There he met an old friend, Pamela Churchill, whom he
had known during World War II, in London, where he had been sent as a
personal envoy of President Franklin D. Roosevelt. She was twenty-one at
the time, and was the wife of Winston Churchill's son Randolph. There
had certainly been more beautiful women in the city, but none had been
more pleasant to be around: she was so attentive, listening to his problems,
befriending his daughter (they were the same age), and calming him when-
ever he saw her. Marie had remained in the States, and Randolph was in
the army, so while bombs rained on London Averell and Pamela had begun
an affair. And in the many years since the war, she had kept in touch with
him: he knew about the breakup of her marriage, and about her endless se-
ries of affairs with Europe's wealthiest playboys. Yet he had not seen her
since his return to America, and to his wife. What a strange coincidence to
run into her at this particular moment in his life.
At the party Pamela pulled Harriman out of his shell, laughing at his
jokes and getting him to talk about London in the glory days of the war.
He felt his old power returning—it was as if he were charming her. A few
days later she dropped in on him at one of his weekend homes. Harriman
was one of the wealthiest men in the world, but was no lavish spender; he
and Marie had lived a Spartan life. Pamela made no comment, but when
she invited him to her own home, he could not help but notice the bright-
ness and vibrancy of her life—flowers everywhere, beautiful linens on the
bed, wonderful meals (she seemed to know all of his favorite foods). He
had heard of her reputation as a courtesan and understood the lure of his
wealth, yet being around her was invigorating, and eight weeks after that
party, he married her.
Pamela did not stop there. She persuaded her husband to donate the art
that Marie had collected to the National Gallery. She got him to part with
some of his money—a trust fund for her son Winston, new houses, constant
redecorations. Her approach was subtle and patient; she made him somehow
feel good about giving her what she wanted. Within a few years, hardly any
traces of Marie remained in their life. Harriman spent less time with his
children and grandchildren. He seemed to be going through a second youth.
In Washington, politicians and their wives viewed Pamela with suspi-
cion. They saw through her, and were immune to her charm, or so they
thought. Yet they always came to the frequent parties she hosted, justify-
ing themselves with the thought that powerful people would be there.
Everything at these parties was calibrated to create a relaxed, intimate
atmosphere. No one felt ignored: the least important people would find
themselves talking to Pamela, opening up to that attentive look of hers. She
made them feel powerful and respected. Afterward she would send them a
