xxii • Preface
hysterical reaction, revealing your deep-down fascination with the process;
you are only making your desires stronger. Some day they will come to the
surface.
To have such power does not require a total transformation in your
character or any kind of physical improvement in your looks. Seduction is a
game of psychology, not beauty, and it is within the grasp of any person to
become a master at the game. All that is required is that you look at the
world differently, through the eyes of a seducer.
A seducer does not turn the power off and on—every social and per-
sonal interaction is seen as a potential seduction. There is never a moment
to waste. This is so for several reasons. The power seducers have over a man
or woman works in social environments because they have learned how to
tone down the sexual element without getting rid of it. We may think we
see through them, but they are so pleasant to be around anyway that it does
not matter. Trying to divide your life into moments in which you seduce
and others in which you hold back will only confuse and constrain you.
Erotic desire and love lurk beneath the surface of almost every human en-
counter; better to give free rein to your skills than to try to use them only
in the bedroom. (In fact, the seducer sees the world as his or her bedroom.)
This attitude creates great seductive momentum, and with each seduction
you gain experience and practice. One social or sexual seduction makes the
next one easier, your confidence growing and making you more alluring.
People are drawn to you in greater numbers as the seducer's aura descends
upon you.
Seducers have a warrior's outlook on life. They see each person as a
kind of walled castle to which they are laying siege. Seduction is a process
of penetration: initially penetrating the target's mind, their first point of
defense. Once seducers have penetrated the mind, making the target fanta-
size about them, it is easy to lower resistance and create physical surrender.
Seducers do not improvise; they do not leave this process to chance. Like
any good general, they plan and strategize, aiming at the target's particular
weaknesses.
The main obstacle to becoming a seducer is this foolish prejudice we
have of seeing love and romance as some kind of sacred, magical realm
where things just fall into place, if they are meant to. This might seem ro-
mantic and quaint, but it is really just a cover for our laziness. What will se-
duce a person is the effort we expend on their behalf, showing how much
we care, how much they are worth. Leaving things to chance is a recipe for
disaster, and reveals that we do not take love and romance very seriously. It
was the effort Casanova expended, the artfulness he applied to each affair
that made him so devilishly seductive. Falling in love is a matter not of
magic but of psychology. Once you understand your target's psychology,
and strategize to suit it, you will be better able to cast a "magical" spell. A
seducer sees love not as sacred but as warfare, where all is fair.
Seducers are never self-absorbed. Their gaze is directed outward, not
inward. When they meet someone their first move is to get inside that per-The first thing to get in
your head is that every
single \ Girl can be
caught—and that you'll
catch her if \ You set your
toils right. Birds will
sooner fall dumb in \
Springtime, \ Cicadas in
summer, or a hunting-dog \
Turn his back on a hare,
than a lover's bland
inducements \ Can fail
with a woman, Even one
you suppose \ Reluctant
will want it.
—OVID, THE ART OF LOVE,
TRANSLATED BY PETER GREEN
The combination of these
two elements, enchantment
and surrender, is, then,
essential to the love which
we are discussing. . . .
What exists in love is
surrender due to
enchantment.
—JOSÉ ORTEGA Y GASSET, ON
LOVE, TRANSLATED BY TOBY
TALBOT
What is good?—All that
heightens the feeling of
power, the will to power,
power itself in man. •
What is bad?—All that
proceeds from weakness. •
What is happiness?—The
feeling that power
increases—that a resistance
is overcome.
—FRIEDRICH NIETZSCHE, THE
ANTI—CHRIST, TRANSLATED BY
R. J. HOLLINGDALE
Preface • xxiii
son's skin, to see the world through their eyes. The reasons for this are sev-
eral. First, self-absorption is a sign of insecurity; it is anti-seductive. Every-
one has insecurities, but seducers manage to ignore them, finding therapy
for moments of self-doubt by being absorbed in the world. This gives them
a buoyant spirit—we want to be around them. Second, getting into some-
one's skin, imagining what it is like to be them, helps the seducer gather
valuable information, learn what makes that person tick, what will make
them lose their ability to think straight and fall into a trap. Armed with
such information, they can provide focused and individualized attention—a
rare commodity in a world in which most people see us only from behind
the screen of their own prejudices. Getting into the targets' skin is the first
important tactical move in the war of penetration.
Seducers see themselves as providers of pleasure, like bees that gather
pollen from some flowers and deliver it to others. As children we mostly
devoted our lives to play and pleasure. Adults often have feelings of being
cut off from this paradise, of being weighed down by responsibilities. The
seducer knows that people are waiting for pleasure—they never get enough
of it from friends and lovers, and they cannot get it by themselves. A person
who enters their lives offering adventure and romance cannot be resisted.
Pleasure is a feeling of being taken past our limits, of being overwhelmed—
by another person, by an experience. People are dying to be overwhelmed,
to let go of their usual stubbornness. Sometimes their resistance to us is
a way of saying, Please seduce me. Seducers know that the possibility of
pleasure will make a person follow them, and the experience of it will
make someone open up, weak to the touch. They also train themselves to
be sensitive to pleasure, knowing that feeling pleasure themselves will make
it that much easier for them to infect the people around them.
A seducer sees all of life as theater, everyone an actor. Most people feel
they have constricted roles in life, which makes them unhappy. Seducers,
on the other hand, can be anyone and can assume many roles. (The arche-
type here is the god Zeus, insatiable seducer of young maidens, whose
main weapon was the ability to assume the form of whatever person or ani-
mal would most appeal to his victim.) Seducers take pleasure in performing
and are not weighed down by their identity, or by some need to be them-
selves, or to be natural. This freedom of theirs, this fluidity in body and
spirit, is what makes them attractive. What people lack in life is not more
reality but illusion, fantasy, play. The clothes that seducers wear, the places
they take you to, their words and actions, are slightly heightened—not
overly theatrical but with a delightful edge of unreality, as if the two of you
were living out a piece of fiction or were characters in a film. Seduction is
a kind of theater in real life, the meeting of illusion and reality.
Finally, seducers are completely amoral in their approach to life. It is all
a game, an arena for play. Knowing that the moralists, the crabbed repressed
types who croak about the evils of the seducer, secretly envy their power,
they do not concern themselves with other people's opinions. They do not
deal in moral judgments—nothing could be less seductive. Everything isThe disaffection, neurosis,
anguish and frustration
encountered by
psychoanalysis comes no
doubt from being unable to
love or to be loved, from
being unable to give or take
pleasure, but the radical
disenchantment comes from
seduction and its failure.
Only those who lie
completely outside
seduction are ill, even if
they remain fully capable of
loving and making love.
Psychoanalysis believes it
treats the disorder of sex
and desire, but in reality it
is dealing with the
disorders of seduction. . . .
The most serious
deficiencies always concern
charm and not pleasure,
enchantment and not some
vital or sexual satisfaction.
—JEAN BAUDRILLARD,
SEDUCTION
Whatever is done from love
always occurs beyond good
and evil.
—FRIEDRICH NIETZSCHE,
BEYOND GOOD AND EVIL,
TRANSLATED BY WALTER
KAUFMANN
