Master the Art of the Bold Move • 409
desired as a woman, and on some level cannot help but enjoy his love for
her. Of course she struggles and resists, but that is only a sign that her emo-
tions are engaged. (Indifference is the single most effective deterrent to
seduction.) By taking his time, by making no bold moves even when he has
the opportunity for them, he instills in her a false sense of security and
proves himself by being patient. On what he pretends is his last visit to her,
however, he can sense she is ready—weak, confused, more afraid of losing
the addictive feeling of being desired than of suffering the consequences of
adultery. He deliberately makes her emotional, dramatically displays her let-
ters, creates some tension by playing a game of push-and-pull, and when
she takes his arm, he knows it is the time to strike. Now he moves quickly,
allowing her no time for doubts or second thoughts. But his move seems to
arise out of love, not lust. After so much resistance and tension, what a
pleasure to finally surrender. The climax now comes as a great release.
Never underestimate the role of vanity in love and seduction. If you
seem impatient, champing at the bit for sex, you signal that it is all about
libido, and that it has little to do with the target's own charms. That is
why you must defer the climax. A lengthier courtship will feed the target's
vanity, and will make the effect of your bold move all the more powerful
and enduring. Wait too long, though—showing desire, but then proving
too timid to make your move—and you will stir up a different kind of inse-
curity: "You found me desirable, but you are not acting on your desires;
maybe you're not so interested." Doubts like these affront your target's
vanity (if you're not interested, maybe I'm not so interesting), and are fatal
in the latter stages of seduction; awkwardness and misunderstandings will
spring up everywhere. Once you read in your targets' gestures that they are
ready and open—a look in the eye, mirroring behavior, a strange nervous-
ness in your presence—you must go on the offensive, make them feel that
their charms have unhinged you and pushed you into the bold move. They
will then have the ultimate pleasure: physical surrender and a psychological
boost to their vanity.
The more timidity a lover shows with us the more it con-
cerns our pride to goad him on; the more respect he has for
our resistance, the more respect we demand of him. We
would willingly say to you men: "Ah, in pity's name do
not suppose us to be so very virtuous; you are forcing us to
have too much of it."
—NINON DE L'ENCLOS
Keys to Seduction
Think of seduction as a world you enter, a world that is separate and
distinct from the real world. The rules are different here; what works
in daily life can have the opposite effect in seduction. The real world fea-take care \ Not to bruise
her tender lips with such
hard-snatched kisses, \
Don't give her a chance to
protest \ You're too rough.
Those who grab their
kisses, but not what
follows, \ Deserve to lose
all they've gained. How
short were you \ Of the
ultimate goal after all your
kissing? That was \
Gaucheness, not modesty,
I'm afraid . . .
—OVID, THE ART OF LOVE,
TRANSLATED BY PETER GREEN
I have tested all manner of
pleasures, and known every
variety of joy; and I have
found that neither intimacy
with princes, nor wealth
acquired, nor finding after
lacking, nor returning after
long absence, nor security
after fear and repose in a
safe refuge—none of these
things so powerfully affects
the soul as union with the
beloved, especially if it
come after long denial and
continual banishment. For
then the flame of passion
waxes exceeding hot, and
the furnace of yearning
blazes up, and the fire of
eager hope rages ever more
fiercely.
—IBN HAZM, THE RING OF
THE DOVE: A TREATISE ON THE
ART AND PRACTICE OF ARAB
LOVE, TRANSLATED BY A. J.
ARBERRY
I knew once two great
lords, brothers, both of
them highly bred and
highly accomplished
gentlemen which did love
two ladies, but the one of
these was of much higher
quality and more account
than the other in all
respects. Now being entered
both into the chamber of
410 • The Art of Seduction
tures a democratizing, leveling impulse, in which everything has to seem at
least something like equal. An overt imbalance of power, an overt desire for
power, will stir envy and resentment; we learn to be kind and polite, at least
on the surface. Even those who have power generally try to act humble and
modest—they do not want to offend. In seduction, on the other hand, you
can throw all of that out, revel in your dark side, inflict a little pain—in
some ways be more yourself. Your naturalness in this respect will prove se-
ductive in itself. The problem is that after years of living in the real world,
we lose the ability to be ourselves. We become timid, humble, overpolite.
Your task is to regain some of your childhood qualities, to root out all this
false humility. And the most important quality to recapture is boldness.
No one is born timid; timidity is a protection we develop. If we never
stick our necks out, if we never try, we will never have to suffer the conse-
quences of failure or success. If we are kind and unobtrusive, no one will
be offended—in fact we will seem saintly and likable. In truth, timid peo-
ple are often self-absorbed, obsessed with the way people see them, and not
at all saintly. And humility may have its social uses, but it is deadly in seduc-
tion. You need to be able to play the humble saint at times; it is a mask you
wear. But in seduction, take it off. Boldness is bracing, erotic, and ab-
solutely necessary to bring the seduction to its conclusion. Done right, it
tells your targets that they have made you lose your normal restraint, and
gives them license to do so as well. People are yearning to have a chance to
play out the repressed sides of their personality. At the final stage of a se-
duction, boldness eliminates any awkwardness or doubts. In a dance, two
people cannot lead. One takes over, sweeping the other along. Seduction is
not egalitarian; it is not a harmonic convergence. Holding back at the end
out of fear of offending, or thinking it correct to share the power, is a
recipe for disaster. This is an arena not for politics but for pleasure. It can be
by the man or woman, but a bold move is required. If you are so con-
cerned about the other person, console yourself with the thought that
the pleasure of the one who surrenders is often greater than that of the
aggressor.
As a young man, the actor Errol Flynn was uncontrollably bold. This
often got him into trouble; he became too aggressive around desirable
women. Then, while traveling through the Far East, he became interested
in the Asian practice of tantric sex, in which the male must train himself
not to ejaculate, preserving his potency and heightening both partners'
pleasure in the process. Flynn later applied this principle to his seductions as
well, teaching himself to restrain his natural boldness and delay the end of
the seduction as long as possible. So, while boldness can work wonders, un-
controllable boldness is not seductive but frightening; you need to be able
to turn it on and off at will, know when to use it. As in Tantrism, you can
create more pleasure by delaying the inevitable.
In the 1720s, the Duc de Richelieu developed an infatuation with a
certain duchess. The woman was exceptionally beautiful, and was desired
by one and all, but she was far too virtuous to take a lover, although shethis great lady, who for the
time being was keeping her
bed, each did withdraw
apart for to entertain his
mistress. The one did
converse with the high-born
dame with every possible
respect and humble saluta-
tion and kissing of hands,
with words of honor and
stately compliment, without
making ever an attempt to
come near and try to force
the place. The other brother,
without any ceremony of
words or fine phrases, did
take his fair one to a
recessed window, and
incontinently making free
with her (for he was very
strong), he did soon show
her 'twas not his way to
love à l'espagnole, with
eyes and tricks of face and
words, but in the genuine
fashion and proper mode
every true lover should
desire. Presently having
finished his task, he doth
quit the chamber; but as he
goes, saith to his brother,
loud enough for his lady to
hear the words: "Do you
as I have done, brother
mine; else you do naught at
all. Be you as brave and
hardy as you will else-
where, yet if you show not
your hardihood here and
now, you are disgraced; for
here is no place of cere-
mony and respect, but one
where you do see your lady
before you, which doth but
wait your attack." So with
this he did leave his brother,
which yet for that while did
refrain him and put it off to
another time. But for this
the lady did by no means
esteem him more highly,
whether it was she did put
it down to an overchilliness
in love, or a lack of courage,
or a defect of bodily vigor.
—SEIGNEUR DE BRANTÔME,
LIVES OF FAIR & GALLANT
LADIES, TRANSLATED BY A. R.
ALLINSON
