The Romantic Ideal
One evening around 1760, at the opera in the city of Cologne, a beau-
tiful young woman sat in her box, watching the audience. Beside her
was her husband, the town burgomaster—a middle-aged man and amiable
enough, but dull. Through her opera glasses the young woman noticed a
handsome man wearing a stunning outfit. Evidently her stare was noticed,
for after the opera the man introduced himself: his name was Giovanni Gi-
acomo Casanova.
The stranger kissed the woman's hand. She was going to a ball the fol-
lowing night, she told him; would he like to come? "If I might dare to
hope, Madame," he replied, "that you will dance only with me."
The next night, after the ball, the woman could think only of Casanova.
He had seemed to anticipate her thoughts—had been so pleasant, and yet
so bold. A few days later he dined at her house, and after her husband had
retired for the evening she showed him around. In her boudoir she pointed
out a wing of the house, a chapel, just outside her window. Sure enough, as
if he had read her mind, Casanova came to the chapel the next day to at-
tend Mass, and seeing her at the theater that evening he mentioned to her
that he had noticed a door there that must lead to her bedroom. She
laughed, and pretended to be surprised. In the most innocent of tones, he
said that he would find a way to hide in the chapel the next day—and al-
most without thinking, she whispered she would visit him there after every-
one had gone to bed.
So Casanova hid in the chapel's tiny confessional, waiting all day and
evening. There were rats, and he had nothing to lie upon; yet when the
burgomaster's wife finally came, late at night, he did not complain, but qui-
etly followed her to her room. They continued their trysts for several days.
By day she could hardly wait for night: finally something to live for, an ad-
venture. She left him food, books, and candles to ease his long and tedious
stays in the chapel—it seemed wrong to use a place of worship for such a
purpose, but that only made the affair more exciting. A few days later,
however, she had to take a journey with her husband. By the time she got
back, Casanova had disappeared, as quickly and gracefully as he had come.
Some years later, in London, a young woman named Miss Pauline no-
ticed an ad in a local newspaper. A gentleman was looking for a lady lodger
to rent a part of his house. Miss Pauline came from Portugal, and was of
the nobility; she had eloped to London with a lover, but he had beenIf at first sight a girl does
not make such a deep
impression on a person that
she awakens the ideal,
then ordinarily the
actuality is not especially
desirable; but if she does,
then no matter how
experienced a person is he
usually is rather
overwhelmed.
—SØREN KIERKEGAARD, THE
SEDUCER'S DIARY, TRANSLATED
BY HOWARD V. HONG AND
EDNA H. HONG
A good lover will behave as
elegantly at dawn as at any
other time. He drags
himself out of bed with a
look of dismay on his face.
The lady urges him on:
"Come, my friend, it's
getting light. You don't
want anyone to find you
here." He gives a deep
sigh, as if to say that the
night has not been nearly
long enough and that it is
agony to leave. Once up,
he does not instantly pull
on his trousers. Instead he
comes close to the lady and
whispers whatever was left
unsaid during the night.
Even when he is dressed,
he still lingers, vaguely
pretending to be fastening
31
32 • The Art of Seduction
forced to return home and she had had to stay on alone for some while be-
fore she could join him. Now she was lonely, and had little money, and was
depressed by her squalid circumstances—after all, she had been raised as a
lady. She answered the ad.
The gentleman turned out to be Casanova, and what a gentleman he
was. The room he offered was nice, and the rent was low; he asked only for
occasional companionship. Miss Pauline moved in. They played chess, went
riding, discussed literature. He was so well-bred, polite, and generous. A se-
rious and high-minded girl, she came to depend on their friendship; here
was a man she could talk to for hours. Then one day Casanova seemed
changed, upset, excited: he confessed that he was in love with her. She was
going back to Portugal soon, to rejoin her lover, and this was not what she
wanted to hear. She told him he should go riding to calm down.
Later that evening she received news: he had fallen from his horse. Feel-
ing responsible for his accident, she rushed to him, found him in bed, and
fell into his arms, unable to control herself. The two became lovers that
night, and remained so for the rest of Miss Pauline's stay in London. Yet
when it came time for her to leave for Portugal, he did not try to stop her;
instead, he comforted her, reasoning that each of them had offered the
other the perfect, temporary antidote to their loneliness, and that they
would be friends for life.
Some years later, in a small Spanish town, a young and beautiful girl
named Ignazia was leaving church after confession. She was approached by
Casanova. Walking her home, he explained that he had a passion for danc-
ing the fandango, and invited her to a ball the following evening. He was so
different from anyone in the town, which bored her so—she desperately
wanted to go. Her parents were against the arrangement, but she persuaded
her mother to act as a chaperone. After an unforgettable evening of danc-
ing (and he danced the fandango remarkably well for a foreigner), Casa-
nova confessed that he was madly in love with her. She replied (very sadly,
though) that she already had a fiancé. Casanova did not force the issue, but
over the next few days he took Ignazia to more dances and to the bullfights.
On one of these occasions he introduced her to a friend of his, a duchess,
who flirted with him brazenly; Ignazia was terribly jealous. By now she was
desperately in love with Casanova, but her sense of duty and religion for-
bade such thoughts.
Finally, after days of torment, Ignazia sought out Casanova and took his
hand: "My confessor tried to make me promise to never be alone with you
again," she said, "and as I could not, he refused to give me absolution. It is
the first time in my life such a thing has happened to me. I have put myself
in God's hands. I have made up my mind, so long as you are here, to do all
you wish. When to my sorrow you leave Spain, I shall find another confes-
sor. My fancy for you is, after all, only a passing madness."
Casanova was perhaps the most successful seducer in history; few women
could resist him. His method was simple: on meeting a woman, he wouldhis sash. • Presently he
raises the lattice, and the
two lovers stand together by
the side door while he tells
her how he dreads the
coining day, which will
keep them apart; then he
slips away. The lady
watches him go, and this
moment of parting will
remain among her most
charming memories. •
Indeed, one's attachment to
a man depends largely on
the elegance of his leave-
taking. When he jumps
out of bed, scurries about
the room, tightly fastens
his trouser sash, rolls up
the sleeves of his court
cloak, overrobe, or hunting
costume, stuffs his
belongings into the breast
of his robe and then briskly
secures the outer sash—one
really begins to hate him.
—THE PILLOW BOOK OF SEI
SHONAGON, TRANSLATED AND
EDITED BY IVAN MORRIS
