
Preface
Thousands of years ago, power was mostly gained through physical vio-
lence and maintained with brute strength. There was little need for
subtlety—a king or emperor had to be merciless. Only a select few had
power, but no one suffered under this scheme of things more than women.
They had no way to compete, no weapon at their disposal that could make
a man do what they wanted—politically, socially, or even in the home.
Of course men had one weakness: their insatiable desire for sex. A
woman could always toy with this desire, but once she gave in to sex the
man was back in control; and if she withheld sex, he could simply look
elsewhere—or exert force. What good was a power that was so temporary
and frail? Yet women had no choice but to submit to this condition. There
were some, though, whose hunger for power was too great, and who, over
the years, through much cleverness and creativity, invented a way of turn-
ing the dynamic around, creating a more lasting and effective form of
power.
These women—among them Bathsheba, from the Old Testament;
Helen of Troy; the Chinese siren Hsi Shi; and the greatest of them all,
Cleopatra—invented seduction. First they would draw a man in with an al-
luring appearance, designing their makeup and adornment to fashion the
image of a goddess come to life. By showing only glimpses of flesh, they
would tease a man's imagination, stimulating the desire not just for sex but
for something greater: the chance to possess a fantasy figure. Once they had
their victims' interest, these women would lure them away from the mascu-
line world of war and politics and get them to spend time in the feminine
world—a world of luxury, spectacle, and pleasure. They might also lead
them astray literally, taking them on a journey, as Cleopatra lured Julius
Caesar on a trip down the Nile. Men would grow hooked on these refined,
sensual pleasures—they would fall in love. But then, invariably, the women
would turn cold and indifferent, confusing their victims. Just when the
men wanted more, they found their pleasures withdrawn. They would be
forced into pursuit, trying anything to win back the favors they once had
tasted and growing weak and emotional in the process. Men who had
physical force and all the social power—men like King David, the Trojan
Paris, Julius Caesar, Mark Antony, King Fu Chai—would find themselves
becoming the slave of a woman.
In the face of violence and brutality, these women made seduction aOppression and scorn,
thus, were and must have
been generally the share of
women in emerging
societies; this state lasted in
all its force until centuries
of experience taught them
to substitute skill for force.
Women at last sensed that,
since they were weaker,
their only resource was to
seduce; they understood
that if they were dependent
on men through force, men
could become dependent on
them through pleasure.
More unhappy than men,
they must have thought
and reflected earlier than
did men; they were the first
to know that pleasure was
always beneath the idea
that one formed of it, and
that the imagination went
farther than nature. Once
these basic truths were
known, they learned first
to veil their charms in order
to awaken curiosity; they
practiced the difficult art of
refusing even as they
wished to consent; from
that moment on, they
knew how to set men's
imagination afire, they
knew how to arouse and
direct desires as they
pleased: thus did beauty
and love come into being;
now the lot of women
