Master the Art of Insinuation • 217
czar: a peace treaty in which they agreed to carve up Europe and the Mid-
dle East; and a marriage alliance, in which he would divorce his wife
Josephine and marry into the czar's family. Instead of proposing these
things directly, Napoleon decided to seduce the czar. Using polite social
encounters and friendly conversations as his battlefields, he went to work.
An apparent slip of the tongue revealed that Josephine could not bear chil-
dren; Napoleon quickly changed the subject. A comment here and there
seemed to suggest a linking of the destinies of France and Russia. Just be-
fore they were to part one evening, he talked of his desire for children,
sighed sadly, then excused himself for bed, leaving the czar to sleep on
this. He escorted the czar to a play on the themes of glory, honor, and
empire; now, in later conversations, he could disguise his insinuations un-
der the cover of discussing the play. Within a few weeks, the czar was
speaking to his ministers of a marriage alliance and a treaty with France as
if they were his own ideas.
Slips of the tongue, apparently inadvertent "sleep on it" comments, al-
luring references, statements for which you quickly apologize—all of these
have immense insinuating power. They get under people's skin like a poi-
son, and take on a life of their own. The key to succeeding with your in-
sinuations is to make them when your targets are at their most relaxed or
distracted, so that they are not aware of what is happening. Polite banter is
often the perfect front for this; people are thinking about what they will say
next, or are absorbed in their own thoughts. Your insinuations will barely
register, which is how you want it.
In one of his early campaigns, John F. Kennedy addressed a group of
veterans. Kennedy's brave exploits during World War II—the PT-109 inci-
dent had made him a war hero—were known to all; but in the speech, he
talked of the other men on the boat, never mentioning himself. He knew,
however, that what he had done was on everyone's mind, because in fact he
had put it there. Not only did his silence on the subject make them think of
it on their own, it made Kennedy seem humble and modest, qualities that
go well with heroism. In seduction, as the French courtesan Ninon de
l'Enclos advised, it is better not to talk about your love for a person. Let
your target read it in your manner. Your silence on the subject will have
more insinuating power than if you had addressed it directly.
Not only words insinuate; pay attention to gestures and looks. Madame
Récamier's favorite technique was to keep her words banal and the look in
her eyes enticing. The flow of conversation would keep men from thinking
too deeply about these occasional looks, but they would be haunted by
them. Lord Byron had his famous "underlook": while everyone was dis-
cussing some uninteresting subject, he would seem to hang his head, but
then a young woman (the target) would see him glancing upward at her, his
head still tilted. It was a look that seemed dangerous, challenging, but also
ambiguous; many women were hooked by it. The face speaks its own lan-
guage. We are used to trying to read people's faces, which are often better
indicators of their feelings than what they say, which is so easy to control.topics, the friar drew him to
one side and reproached
him in a very kindly sort of
way for the amorous
glances which, as the lady
had given him to
understand, he believed
him to be casting in her
direction. • Not
unnaturally, the gentleman
was amazed, for he had
never so much as looked at
the lady and it was very
seldom that he passed by
her house. . . . • The
gentleman, being rather
more perceptive than the
reverend friar, was not
exactly slow to appreciate
the lady's cleverness, and
putting on a somewhat
sheepish expression, he
promised not to bother her
any more. But after leaving
the friar, he made his way
toward the house of the
lady, who was keeping
continuous vigil at a tiny
little window so that she
would see him if he
happened to pass by. . . .
And from that day
forward, proceeding with
the maximum prudence
and conveying the
impression that he was
engaged in some other
business entirely, he became
a regular visitor to the
neighborhood.
—GIOVANNI BOCCACCIO, THE
DECAMERON, TRANSLATED BY
G. H. MCWILLIAM
Glances are the heavy
artillery of the flirt:
everything can be conveyed
in a look, yet that look can
always be denied, for it
cannot be quoted word for
word.
—STENDHAL, QUOTED IN
RICHARD DAVENPORT-HINES,
ED., VICE: AN ANTHOLOGY
218 • The Art of Seduction
Since people are always reading your looks, use them to transmit the insinu-
ating signals you choose.
Finally, the reason insinuation works so well is not just that it bypasses
people's natural resistance. It is also the language of pleasure. There is too
little mystery in the world; too many people say exactly what they feel or
want. We yearn for something enigmatic, for something to feed our fan-
tasies. Because of the lack of suggestion and ambiguity in daily life, the
person who uses them suddenly seems to have something alluring and full
of promise. It is a kind of titillating game—what is this person up to? What
does he or she mean? Hints, suggestions, and insinuations create a seductive
atmosphere, signaling that their victim is no longer involved in the routines
of daily life but has entered another realm.
Symbol: The Seed.
The soil is carefully prepared. The seeds are planted
months in advance. Once they are in the ground, no one
knows what hand threw them there. They are part of the
earth. Disguise your manipulations by planting seeds
that take root on their own.
Reversal
The danger in insinuation is that when you leave things ambiguous your
target may misread them. There are moments, particularly later on in a
seduction, when it is best to communicate your idea directly, particularly
once you know the target will welcome it, Casanova often played things
that way. When he could sense that a woman desired him, and needed little
preparation, he would use a direct, sincere, gushing comment to go straight
to her head like a drug and make her fall under his spell. When the rake
and writer Gabriele D'Annunzio met a woman he desired, he rarely de-
layed. Flattery flowed from his mouth and pen. He would charm with his
"sincerity" (sincerity can be feigned, and is just one stratagem among oth-
ers). This only works, however, when you sense that the target is easily
yours. If not, the defenses and suspicions you raise by direct attack will
make your seduction impossible. When in doubt, indirection is the better
route.
