172 • The Art of Seduction
roring of some gesture of yours, an unusual shyness, even perhaps a flash of
anger or resentment. All of these show that you are having an effect on a
person who is open to your influence.
Like Valmont, you can also recognize the right targets by the effect they
are having on you. Perhaps they make you uneasy—perhaps they corre-
spond to a deep-rooted childhood ideal, or represent some kind of personal
taboo that excites you, or suggest the person you imagine you would be if
you were the opposite sex. When a person has such a deep effect on you, it
transforms all of your subsequent maneuvers. Your face and gestures be-
come more animated. You have more energy; when victims resist you (as a
good victim should) you in turn will be more creative, more motivated to
overcome their resistance. The seduction will move forward like a good
play. Your strong desire will infect the target and give them the dangerous
sensation that they have a power over you. Of course, you are the one ulti-
mately in control since you are making your victims emotional at the right
moments, leading them back and forth. Good seducers choose targets that
inspire them but they know how and when to restrain themselves.
Never rush into the waiting arms of the first person who seems to like
you. That is not seduction but insecurity. The need that draws you will
make for a low-level attachment, and interest on both sides will sag. Look
at the types you have not considered before—that is where you will find
challenge and adventure. Experienced hunters do not choose their prey by
how easily it is caught; they want the thrill of the chase, a life-and-death
struggle—the fiercer the better.
Although the victim who is perfect for you depends on you, certain
types lend themselves to a more satisfying seduction. Casanova liked young
women who were unhappy, or had suffered a recent misfortune. Such
women appealed to his desire to play the savior, but it also responded to ne-
cessity: happy people are much harder to seduce. Their contentment makes
them inaccessible. It is always easier to fish in troubled waters. Also, an air
of sadness is itself quite seductive—Genji, the hero of the Japanese novel
The Tale of Genji, could not resist a woman with a melancholic air. In
Kierkegaard's book The Seducer's Diary, the narrator, Johannes, has one
main requirement in his victim: she must have imagination. That is why he
chooses a woman who lives in a fantasy world, a woman who will envelop
his every gesture in poetry, imagining far more than is there. Just as it is
hard to seduce a person who is happy, it is hard to seduce a person who has
no imagination.
For women, the manly man is often the perfect victim. Mark Antony
was of this type—he loved pleasure, was quite emotional, and when it
came to women, found it hard to think straight. He was easy for Cleopatra
to manipulate. Once she gained a hold on his emotions, she kept him per-
manently on a string. A woman should never be put off by a man who
seems overly aggressive. He is often the perfect victim. It is easy, with a few
coquettish tricks, to turn that aggression around and make him your slave.
Such men actually enjoy being made to chase after a woman.in rank or ability; a
woman who is proud of her
skill in the arts; . . . a
woman who is slighted by
her husband without any
cause; . . . a woman whose
husband is devoted to
travelling; the wife of a
jeweler; a jealous woman;
a covetous woman.
—THE HINDI: ART OF LOVE,
EDITED BY EDWARD WINDSOR
Leisure stimulates love,
leisure watches the
lovelorn, \ Leisure's the
cause and sustenance of
this sweet \ Evil.
Eliminate leisure, and
Cupid's bow is broken, \
His torches lie lightless,
scorned. \ As a plane-tree
rejoices in wine, as a poplar
in water, \ As a marsh-reed
in swampy ground, so
Venus loves \ Leisure. . . .
\ Why do you think
Aegisthus \ Became an
adulterer? Easy: he was
idle—and bored. \
Everyone else was away at
Troy on a lengthy \
Campaign: all Greece had
shipped \ Its contingent
across. Suppose he
hankered for warfare?
Argos \ Had no wars to
offer. Suppose he fancied
the courts? \ Argos lacked
litigation. Love was better
than doing nothing. \
That's how Cupid slips
in; that's how he stays.
—OVID, CURES FOR LOVE,
TRANSLATED BY PETER GREEN
The Chinese have a
proverb: "When Yang is in
the ascendant, Yin is
born," which means,
translated into our
language, that when a man
has devoted the better of
his life to the ordinary
business of living, the Yin,
Choose the Right Victim • 173
Be careful with appearances. The person who seems volcanically pas-
sionate is often hiding insecurity and self-involvement. This was what most
men failed to perceive in the nineteenth-century courtesan Lola Montez.
She seemed so dramatic, so exciting. In fact, she was a troubled, self-
obsessed woman, but by the time men discovered this it was too late—they
had become involved with her and could not extricate themselves without
months of drama and torture. People who are outwardly distant or shy are
often better targets than extroverts. They are dying to be drawn out, and
still waters run deep.
People with a lot of time on their hands are extremely susceptible to se-
duction. They have mental space for you to fill. Tullia d'Aragona, the infa-
mous sixteenth-century Italian courtesan, preferred young men as her
victims; besides the physical reason for such a preference, they were more
idle than working men with careers, and therefore more defenseless against
an ingenious seductress. On the other hand, you should generally avoid
people who are preoccupied with business or work—seduction demands
attention, and busy people have too little space in their minds for you to
occupy.
According to Freud, seduction begins early in life, in our relationship
with our parents. They seduce us physically, both with bodily contact and
by satisfying desires such as hunger, and we in turn try to seduce them into
paying us attention. We are creatures by nature vulnerable to seduction
throughout our lives. We all want to be seduced; we yearn to be drawn out
of ourselves, out of our routines and into the drama of eros. And what
draws us more than anything is the feeling that someone has something we
don't, a quality we desire. Your perfect victims are often people who think
you have something they don't, and who will be enchanted to have it pro-
vided for them. Such victims may have a temperament quite the opposite
of yours, and this difference will create an exciting tension.
When Jiang Qing, later known as Madame Mao, first met Mao Tse-
tung in 1937 in his mountain retreat in western China, she could sense
how desperate he was for a bit of color and spice in his life: all the camp's
women dressed like the men, and abjured any feminine finery. Jiang had
been an actress in Shanghai, and was anything but austere. She supplied
what he lacked, and she also gave him the added thrill of being able to edu-
cate her in communism, appealing to his Pygmalion complex—the desire
to dominate, control, and remake a person. In fact it was Jiang Qing who
controlled her future husband.
The greatest lack of all is excitement and adventure, which is precisely
what seduction offers. In 1964, the Chinese actor Shi Pei Pu, a man who
had gained fame as a female impersonator, met Bernard Bouriscout, a young
diplomat assigned to the French embassy in China. Bouriscout had come
to China looking for adventure, and was disappointed to have little contact
with Chinese people. Pretending to be a woman who, when still a child,
had been forced to live as a boy—supposedly the family already had too
many daughters—Shi Pei Pu used the young Frenchman's boredom andor emotional side of his
nature, rises to the surface
and demands its rights.
When such a period occurs,
all that which has formerly
seemed important loses its
significance. The will-of-
the-wisp of illusion leads
the man hither and thither,
taking him on strange and
complicated deviations from
his former path in life.
Ming Huang, the "Bright
Emperor" of the T'ang
dynasty, was an example
of the profound truth of
this theory. From the
moment he saw Yang
Kuei-fei bathing in the
lake near his palace in the
Li mountains, he was
destined to sit at her feet,
learning from her the
emotional mysteries of
what the Chinese call Yin.
—ELOISE TALCOTT HIBBERT,
EMBROIDERED GAUZE:
PORTRAITS OF FAMOUS
CHINESE LADIES
