254 • The Art of Seduction
had been the rallying cry in the fight against the Nazis. Everyone shouted it
back. In the next few days de Gaulle made similar speeches around Algeria,
to equally delirious crowds.
Only after de Gaulle had returned to France did the words of his
speeches sink in: not once had he promised to keep Algeria French. In fact
he had hinted that he might give the Arabs the vote, and might grant an
amnesty to the Algerian rebels who had been fighting to force the French
from the country. Somehow, in the excitement his words had created, the
colonists had failed to focus on what they had actually meant. De Gaulle
had duped them. And indeed, in the months to come, he worked to grant
Algeria its independence—a task he finally accomplished in 1962.
Interpretation. De Gaulle cared little about an old French colony, and
about what it symbolized to some French people. Nor did he have any
sympathy for anyone who fomented civil war. His one concern was to
make France a modern power. And so, when he went to Algiers, he had a
long-term plan: weaken the right-wingers by getting them to fight among
themselves, and work toward Algerian independence. His short-term goal
had to be to defuse the tension and buy himself some time. He would not
lie to the colonials by saying he supported their cause—that would cause
trouble back home. Instead he would beguile them with seductive oratory,
intoxicate them with words. His famous "I have understood you" could
easily have meant, "I understand what a danger you represent." But a jubi-
lant crowd expecting his support read it the way they wanted. To keep
them at a fever pitch, de Gaulle made emotional references—to the French
Resistance during World War II, for example, and to the need for "disci-
pline," a word with great appeal to right-wingers. He filled their ears with
promises—a new government, a glorious future. He got them to chant,
creating an emotional bond. He spoke with dramatic pitch and quivering
emotion. His words created a kind of delirium.
De Gaulle was not trying to express his feelings or speak the truth; he
was trying to produce an effect. This is the key to seductive oratory.
Whether you are talking to a single individual or to a crowd, try a little ex-
periment: rein in your desire to speak your mind. Before you open your
mouth, ask yourself a question: what can I say that will have the most
pleasant effect on my listeners? Often this entails flattering their egos,
assuaging their insecurities, giving them vague hopes for the future, sympa-
thizing with their travails ("I have understood you"). Start off with some-
thing pleasant and everything to come will be easy: people's defenses will
go down. They will grow amenable, open to suggestion. Think of your
words as an intoxicating drug that will make people emotional and con-
fused. Keep your language vague and ambiguous, letting your listeners fill
in the gaps with their fantasies and imaginings. Instead of tuning you out,
getting irritated or defensive, being impatient for you to shut up, they will
be pliant, happy with your sweet-sounding words.labors. So farewell, heroic \
Figures of legend—the
quid \ Pro quo you offer
won't tempt me. A bevy of
beauties \ All swooning
over my love-songs—that's
what I want.
—OVID, THE AMORES,
TRANSLATED BY PETER GREEN
When she has received a
letter, when its sweet
poison has entered her
blood, then a word is
sufficient to wake her love
burst forth. . . . My
personal presence will
prevent ecstasy. If I am
present only in a letter,
then she can easily cope
with me; to some extent,
she mistakes me for a more
universal creature who
dwells in her love. Then,
too, in a letter one can
more readily have free rein;
in a letter I can throw
myself at her feet in superb
fashion, etc.—something
that would easily seem like
nonsense if I did it in
person, and the illusion
would be lost. . . . • On
the whole, letters are and
will continue to be a
priceless means of making
an impression on a young
girl; the dead letter of
writing often has much
more influence than the
living word. A letter is a
secretive communication;
one is master of the
situation, feels no pressure
from anyone's actual
presence, and I do believe a
young girl would prefer to
be alone with her ideal.
—SØREN KIERKEGAARD,
THE SEDUCER'S DIARY,
TRANSLATED BY HOWARD V.
HONG AND EDNA H. HONG
Use the Demonic Power of Words to Sow Confusion • 255
Seductive Writing
One spring afternoon in the late 1830s, in a street in Copenhagen, a
man named Johannes caught a glimpse of a beautiful young girl. Self-
absorbed yet delightfully innocent, she fascinated him, and he followed her,
from a distance, and found out where she lived. Over the next few weeks
he made inquiries and found out more about her. Her name was Cordelia
Wahl, and she lived with her aunt. The two led a quiet existence; Cordelia
liked to read, and to be alone. Seducing young girls was Johannes's specialty,
but Cordelia would be a catch: she had already turned down several eligible
suitors.
Johannes imagined that Cordelia might hunger for something more
out of life, something grand, something resembling the books she had
read and the daydreams that presumably filled her solitude. He arranged
an introduction and began to frequent her house, accompanied by a friend
of his named Edward. This young man had his own thoughts of court-
ing Cordelia, but he was awkward, and strained to please her. Johannes,
on the other hand, virtually ignored her, instead befriending her aunt.
They would talk about the most banal things—farm life, whatever was in
the news. Occasionally Johannes would veer off into a more philosophical
discussion, for he had noticed, out of the corner of his eye, that on these
occasions Cordelia would listen to him closely, while still pretending to lis-
ten to Edward.
This went on for several weeks. Johannes and Cordelia barely spoke,
but he could tell that he intrigued her, and that Edward irritated her to no
end. One morning, knowing her aunt was out, he visited their house. It
was the first time he and Cordelia had been alone together. As dryly and
politely as possible, he proceeded to propose to her. Needless to say she was
shocked and flustered. A man who had shown not the slightest interest in
her suddenly wanted to marry her? She was so surprised that she referred
the matter to her aunt, who, as Johannes had expected, gave her approval.
Had Cordelia resisted, her aunt would have respected her wishes; but she
did not.
On the outside, everything had changed. The couple were engaged. Jo-
hannes now came to the house alone, sat with Cordelia, held her hand,
talked with her. But inwardly he made sure things were the same. He re-
mained distant and polite. He would sometimes warm up, particularly
when talking about literature (Cordelia's favorite subject), but at a certain
point he always went back to more mundane matters. He knew this frus-
trated Cordelia, who had expected that now he would be different. Yet
even when they went out together, he took her to formal socials arranged
for engaged couples. How conventional! Was this what love and marriage
were supposed to be about, these prematurely aged people talking about
houses and their own drab futures? Cordelia, who was shy at the best of
times, asked Johannes to stop dragging her to these affairs.
The battlefield was prepared. Cordelia was confused and anxious.Let wax pave the way for
you, spread out on smooth
tablets, \ Let wax go before
as witness to your mind—
\ Bring her your flattering
words, words that ape the
lover: \ And remember,
whoever you are, to throw
in some good \ Entreaties.
Entreaties are what made
Achilles give back \
Hector's Body to Priam;
even an angry god \ Is
moved by the voice of
prayer. Make promises,
what's the harm in \
Promising? Here's where
anyone can play rich....
\ A persuasive letter's \ The
thing to lead off with,
explore her mind, \
Reconnoiter the landscape.
A message scratched on an
apple \ Betrayed Cydippe:
she was snared by her own
words. \ My advice, then,
young men of Rome, is to
learn the noble \ Advocate's
arts—not only to let you
defend \ Some trembling
client: a woman, no less
than the populace, \ Elite
senator, or grave judge, \
Will surrender to
eloquence. Nevertheless,
dissemble \ Your powers,
avoid long words, \ Don't
look too highbrow. Who
but a mindless ninny \
Declaims to his mistress?
An overlettered style \
Repels girls as often as not.
Use ordinary language, \
Familiar yet coaxing
words—as though \ You
were there, in her presence.
If she refuses your letter, \
Sends it back unread,
persist.
—OVID, THE ART OF LOVE.,
TRANSLATED BY PETER GREEN
