The Charismatic • 117
thought would ensure his place in history, for he intended to hint at the
end of the Terror and a new era for France. Rumor also had it that he was
to call for a last handful of people to be sent to the guillotine, a final group
that threatened the safety of the revolution. Mounting the rostrum to ad-
dress the country's governing convention, Robespierre wore the same
clothes he had worn on the day of the festival. The speech was long, almost
three hours, and included an impassioned description of the values and
virtues he had helped protect. There was also talk of conspiracies, treach-
ery, unnamed enemies.
The response was enthusiastic, but a little less so than usual. The speech
had tired many representatives. Then a lone voice was heard, that of a man
named Bourdon, who spoke against printing Robespierre's speech, a veiled
sign of disapproval. Suddenly others stood up on all sides, and accused him
of vagueness: he had talked of conspiracies and threats without naming the
guilty. Asked to be specific, he refused, preferring to name names later on.
The next day Robespierre stood to defend his speech, and the representa-
tives shouted him down. A few hours later, he was the one sent to the guil-
lotine. On July 28, amid a gathering of citizens who seemed to be in an
even more festive mood than at the Festival of the Supreme Being, Robe-
spierre's head fell into the basket, to resounding cheers. The Reign of Ter-
ror was over.
Many of those who seemed to admire Robespierre actually harbored a
gnawing resentment of him—he was so virtuous, so superior, it was oppres-
sive. Some of these men had plotted against him, and were waiting for the
slightest sign of weakness—which appeared on that fateful day when he
gave his last speech. In refusing to name his enemies, he had shown either a
desire to end the bloodshed or a fear that they would strike at him before
he could have them killed. Fed by the conspirators, this one spark turned
into fire. Within two days, first a governing body and then a nation turned
against a Charismatic who two months before had been revered.
Charisma is as volatile as the emotions it stirs. Most often it stirs senti-
ments of love. But such feelings are hard to maintain. Psychologists talk of
"erotic fatigue"—the moments after love in which you feel tired of it, re-
sentful. Reality creeps in, love turns to hate. Erotic fatigue is a threat to all
Charismatics. The Charismatic often wins love by acting the savior, rescu-
ing people from some difficult circumstance, but once they feel secure,
charisma is less seductive to them. Charismatics need danger and risk. They
are not plodding bureaucrats; some of them deliberately keep danger go-
ing, as de Gaulle and Kennedy were wont to do, or as Robespierre did
through the Reign of Terror. But people tire of this, and at your first sign
of weakness they turn on you. The love they showed before will be
matched by their hatred now.
The only defense is to master your charisma. Your passion, your anger,
your confidence make you charismatic, but too much charisma for too
long creates fatigue, and a desire for calmness and order. The better kind of
118 • The Art of Seduction
charisma is created consciously and is kept under control. When you need
to you can glow with confidence and fervor, inspiring the masses. But
when the adventure is over, you can settle into a routine, turning the heat,
not out, but down. (Robespierre may have been planning that move, but it
came a day too late.) People will admire your self-control and adaptability.
Their love affair with you will move closer to the habitual affection of a
man and wife. You will even have the leeway to look a little boring, a little
simple—a role that can also seem charismatic, if played correctly. Remem-
ber: charisma depends on success, and the best way to maintain success, af-
ter the initial charismatic rush, is to be practical and even cautious. Mao
Zedong was a distant, enigmatic man who for many had an awe-inspiring
charisma. He suffered many setbacks that would have spelled the end of a
less clever man, but after each reversal he retreated, becoming practical, tol-
erant, flexible; at least for a while. This protected him from the dangers of a
counterreaction.
There is another alternative: to play the armed prophet. According to
Machiavelli, although a prophet may acquire power through his charismatic
personality, he cannot long survive without the strength to back it up. He
needs an army. The masses will tire of him; they will need to be forced.
Being an armed prophet may not literally involve arms, but it demands a
forceful side to your character, which you can back up with action. Unfor-
tunately this means being merciless with your enemies for as long as you re-
tain power. And no one creates more bitter enemies than the Charismatic.
Finally, there is nothing more dangerous than succeeding a Charismatic.
These characters are unconventional, and their rule is personal in style, be-
ing stamped with the wildness of their personalities. They often leave chaos
in their wake. The one who follows after a Charismatic is left with a mess,
which the people, however, do not see. They miss their inspirer and blame
the successor. Avoid this situation at all costs. If it is unavoidable, do not try
to continue what the Charismatic started; go in a new direction. By being
practical, trustworthy, and plain-speaking, you can often generate a strange
kind of charisma through contrast. That was how Harry Truman not only
survived the legacy of Roosevelt but established his own type of charisma.
