Appendix A: Seductive Environment/Seductive Time • 435
mirrors. His dupes would feel relaxed, uplifted, and as they sat in the room
where he used magnets for their healing powers, they would feel a kind of
spiritual tingling pass from body to body. Anything vaguely mystical helps
block out the real world, and it is easy to move from the spiritual to the
sexual.
Distort their sense of time—speed and youth. Festival time has a kind of
speed and frenzy that make people feel more alive. Seduction should make
the heart beat faster, so that the seduced loses track of time passing. Take
them to places of constant activity and movement. Embark with them on
some kind of journey together, distracting their minds with new sights.
Youth may fade and disappear, but seduction brings the feeling of being
young, no matter the age of those involved. And youth is mostly energy.
The pace of the seduction must pick up at a certain moment, creating
a whirling effect in the mind. It is no wonder that Casanova did much of
his seducing at balls, or that the waltz was the preferred tool of many a
nineteenth-century rake.
Create moments. Everyday life is a drudgery in which the same actions
endlessly repeat. The festival, on the other hand, we remember as a mo-
ment when everything was transformed—when a little bit of eternity and
myth entered our lives. Your seduction must have such peaks, moments
when something dramatic happens and time is experienced differently.
You must give your targets such moments, whether by staging the seduc-
tion in a place—a carnival, a theater—where they naturally occur or by
creating them yourself, with dramatic actions that stir up strong emo-
tions. Those moments should be pure leisure and pleasure—no thoughts
of work or morality can intrude. Madame de Pompadour, the mistress of
King Louis XV, had to re-seduce her easily bored lover every few months;
intensely creative, she devised parties, balls, games, a little theater at Ver-
sailles. The seduced revels in affairs like this, sensing the effort you have ex-
pended to divert and enchant them.
Scenes from Seductive Time and Place
1. Around the year 1710, a young man whose father was a prosperous
wine dealer in Osaka, Japan, found himself daydreaming more and more.
He worked night and day for his father, and the burden of family life and
all of its duties was oppressive. Like every young man, he had heard of the
pleasure districts of the city—the quarters where the normally strict laws of
the shogunate could be violated. It was here that you would find the ukiyo,
the "floating world" of transient pleasures, a place where actors and courte-
436 • Appendix A: Seductive Environment/Seductive Time
sans ruled. This was what the young man was daydreaming about. Biding
his time, he managed to find an evening when he could slip out unnoticed.
He headed straight for the pleasure quarters.
This was a cluster of buildings—restaurants, exclusive clubs, tea-
houses—that stood out from the rest of the city by their magnificence and
color. The moment the young man stepped into it, he knew he was in
a different world. Actors wandered the streets in elaborately dyed kimonos.
They had such manners and attitudes, as if they were still on stage. The
streets bustled with energy; the pace was fast. Bright lanterns stood out
against the night, as did the colorful posters for the nearby kabuki theater.
The women had a completely different air about them. They stared at him
brazenly, acting with the freedom of a man. He caught sight of an onnagata,
one of the men who played female roles in the theater—a man more beau-
tiful than most women he had seen and whom the passersby treated like
royalty.
The young man saw other young men like himself entering a teahouse,
so he followed them in. Here the highest class of courtesans, the great
tayus, plied their trade. A few minutes after the young man sat down, he
heard a noise and bustle, and down the stairs came a few of the tayus, fol-
lowed by musicians and jesters. The women's eyebrows were shaved, re-
placed by a thick black painted line. Their hair was swept up in a perfect
fold, and he had never seen such beautiful kimonos. The tayus seemed to
float across the floor, using different kinds of steps (suggestive, creeping,
cautious, etc.), depending on whom they were approaching and what they
wanted to communicate to him. They ignored the young man; he had no
idea how to invite them over, but he noticed that some of the older men
had a way of bantering with them that was a language all its own. The
wine began to flow, music was played, and finally some lower-level courte-
sans came in. By then the young man's tongue was loosened. These courtesans
were much friendlier and the young man began to lose all track of time.
Later he managed to stagger home, and only the next morning did he real-
ize how much money he had spent. If father ever found out . . .
Yet a few weeks later he was back. Like hundreds of such sons in Japan
whose stories filled the literature of the period, he was on the path toward
squandering his father's wealth on the "floating world."
Seduction is another world into which you initiate your victims. Like the
ukiyo, it depends on a strict separation from the day-to-day world. When
your victims are in your presence, the outside world—with its morality, its
codes, its responsibilities—is banished. Anything is allowed, particularly
anything normally repressed. The conversation is lighter and more sugges-
tive. Clothes and places have a touch of theatricality. The license exists to
act differently, to be someone else, without any heaviness or judging. It is a
kind of concentrated psychological "floating world" that you create for the
others, and it becomes addictive. When they leave you and return to their
routines, they are doubly aware of what they are missing. The moment
