398 • The Art of Seduction
much else, mind you—he did not speak her language—so she said goodbye
and walked away with her father. But later that day she discovered, to her
dismay, that Mr. Flynn had taken a liking to her and had purchased her
from her father for two pigs, some English coins, and some seashell money.
The family was poor and the father liked the price. Tuperselai had a
boyfriend in the village whom she did not want to leave, but she did not
dare disobey her father, and she left with Mr. Flynn for the tobacco planta-
tion. On the other hand, she had no intention of being friendly with this
man, from whom she expected the worst kind of treatment.
In the first few days, Tuperselai missed her village terribly, and felt ner-
vous and out of sorts. But Mr. Flynn was polite, and talked in a soothing
voice. She began to relax, and since he kept his distance, she decided it was
safe to approach him. His white skin was tasty to the mosquitoes, so she be-
gan to wash him every night with scented bush herbs to keep them away.
Soon she had a thought: Mr. Flynn was lonely, and wanted a companion.
That was why he had bought her. At night he usually read; instead, she be-
gan to entertain him by singing and dancing. Sometimes he tried to com-
municate in words and gestures, struggling in pidgin. She had no idea what
he was trying to say, but he made her laugh. And one day she did under-
stand something: the word "swim." He was inviting her to go swimming
with him in the Laloki River. She was happy to go along, but the river was
full of crocodiles, so she brought along her spear just in case.
At the sight of the river, Mr. Flynn seemed to come alive—he tore off
his clothes and dove in. She followed and swam after him. He put his arms
around her and kissed her. They drifted downstream, and she clung to him.
She had forgotten about the crocodiles; she had also forgotten about her fa-
ther, her boyfriend, her village, and everything else there was to forget.
Around a bend of the river, he picked her up and carried her to a secluded
grove near the river's edge. It all happened rather suddenly, which was fine
with Tuperselai. From then on this was a daily ritual—the river, the
grove—until the time came when the tobacco plantation was no longer
doing so well, and Mr. Flynn left New Guinea.
One day some ten years later, a young girl named Blanca Rosa Welter
went to a party at the Ritz Hotel in Mexico City. As she wandered through
the bar, looking for her friends, a tall older man blocked her path and said
in a charming accent, "You must be Blanca Rosa." He did not have to in-
troduce himself—he was the famous Hollywood actor Errol Flynn. His
face was plastered on posters everywhere, and he was friends of the party's
hosts, the Davises, and had heard them praise the beauty of Blanca Rosa,
who was turning eighteen the following day. He led her to a table in the
corner. His manner was graceful and confident, and listening to him talk,
she forgot about her friends. He spoke of her beauty, repeated her name,
said he could make her a star. Before she knew what was happening, he had
invited her to join him in Acapulco, where he was vacationing. The
Davises, their mutual friends, could come along as chaperones. That would
be wonderful, she said, but her mother would never agree. Don't worry"How do you attract a
man," the Paris
correspondent of the
Stockholm Aftonbladet
asked La Belle on July 3,
1910. • "Make yourself
as feminine as possible;
dress so that the most
interesting portions of your
anatomy are emphasized;
and subtly allow the
gentleman to know you are
willing to yield at the
proper time. . . ." • "The
way to hold a man" Otero
revealed a little later to a
staff writer from the
Johannesburg Morning
Journal, "is to keep acting
as though every time you
meet him you are overcome
with fresh enthusiasm and,
with barely restrained
eagerness, you await his
impetuosity."
—ARTHUR H. LEWIS,
LA BELLE OTERO
"I missed the mental
stimulation when I was
younger," he answered.
"But from the time I began
to have women, shall we
say, on the assembly-line
basis, I discovered that the
only thing you need, want,
or should have is the
absolutely physical. Simply
the physical. No mind at
all. A woman's mind will
get in the way." • "Really?"
• "For me . . . I am
speaking of myself. I don't
speak for male humankind.
I am speaking for what I've
discovered or what I need:
the body, the face, the
physical motion, the voice,
the femaleness, the female
presence . . . totally that,
nothing else. That's the
best. There's no
possessiveness in that."
• I watched him closely. •
"I'm serious," he said.
"That's my view and
feeling. Just the elementary
Use Physical Lures • 399
about that, Flynn replied; and the following day he showed up at their
house with a beautiful gift for Blanca, a ring with her birthstone. Melting
under his charming smile, Blanca's mother agreed to his plan. Later that
day, Blanca found herself on a plane to Acapulco. It was all like a dream.
The Davises, under orders from Blanca's mother, tried not to let her
out of their sight, so Flynn put her on a raft and they drifted out into the
ocean, far from the shore. His flattering words filled her ears, and she let
him hold her hand and kiss her cheek. That night they danced together,
and when the evening was over he escorted her to her room and serenaded
her with a song as they finally parted. It was the end of a perfect day. In the
middle of the night, she woke up to hear him calling her name, from her
hotel-room balcony. How had he gotten there? His room was a floor
above; he must have somehow jumped or swung down, a dangerous ma-
neuver. She approached, not at all afraid, but curious. He pulled her gently
into his arms and kissed her. Her body convulsed; overwhelmed with new
sensations, totally at sea, she began to cry—out of happiness, she said.
Flynn comforted her with a kiss and returned to his room above, in the
same inexplicable way he had arrived. Now Blanca was hopelessly in love
with him and would do anything he asked of her. A few weeks later, in
fact, she followed him to Hollywood, where she went on to become a suc-
cessful actress, known as Linda Christian.
In 1942, an eighteen-year-old girl named Nora Eddington had a tem-
porary job selling cigarettes at the Los Angeles County courthouse. The
place was a madhouse at the time, teeming with tabloid journalists: two
young girls had charged Errol Flynn with rape. Nora of course noticed
Flynn, a tall, dashing man who occasionally bought cigarettes from her, but
her thoughts were with her boyfriend, a young Marine. A few weeks later
Flynn was acquitted, the trial ended, and the place settled down. A man she
had met during the trial called her up one day: he was Flynn's right-hand
man, and on Flynn's behalf, he wanted to invite her up to the actor's house
on Mulholland Drive. Nora had no interest in Flynn, and in fact she was a
little afraid of him, but a girlfriend who was dying to meet him talked her
into going and bringing her along. What did she have to lose? Nora agreed
to go. On the day, Flynn's friend showed up and drove them to a splendid
house on top of a hill. When they arrived, Flynn was standing shirtless by
his swimming pool. He came to greet her and her girlfriend, moving so
gracefully—like a lithe cat—and his manner so relaxed, she felt her jitters
melt away. He gave them a tour of the house, which was full of artifacts of
his various sea voyages. He talked so delightfully of his love of adventure
that she wished she had had adventures of her own. He was the perfect
gentleman, and even let her talk about her boyfriend without the slightest
sign of jealousy.
Nora had a visit from her boyfriend the next day. Somehow he didn't
seem so interesting anymore; they had a fight and broke up on the spot.
That night, Flynn took her out on the town, to the famous Mocambo
nightclub. He was drinking and joking, and she fell into the spirit, and hap-physical female. Nothing
more than that. When you
get hold of that—hang on
to it, for a short while."
—EARL CONRAD,
ERROL FLYNN: A MEMOIR
A sweet disorder in the
dress \ Kindles in clothes a
wantonness: \ A lawn
about the shoulders thrown
\ Into a fine distraction: \
An erring lace, which here
and there \ Enthralls the
crimson stomacher: \ A cuff
neglectful, and thereby \
Ribbands to flow
confusedly: \ A winning
wave (deserving note) \ In
the tempestuous petticoat: \
A careless shoestring, in
whose tie \ I see a wild
civility: \ Do more bewitch
me, than when art \ Is too
precise in every part.
—ROBERT HERRICK,"DELIGHT
IN DISORDER," QUOTED IN
PETER WASHINGTON, ED.,
EROTIC POEMS
Satni, the son of Pharaoh
Usimares, saw a very
beautiful woman on the
plain-stones of the temple.
He called his page, and
said, "Go and tell her that
I, Pharaoh's son, shall give
her ten pieces of gold to
spend an hour with me."
"I am a Pure One, I am
not a low person," answers
the Lady Thubuit. "If you
wish to have your pleasure
with me, you will come to
my house at Bubastis.
Everything will be ready
there." Satni went to
Bubastis by boat. "By my
life," said Thubuit, "come
upstairs with me." On the
upper floor, sanded with
dust of lapis lazuli and
turquoise, Satni saw
several beds covered with
royal linen and many gold
