The Feminine Dandy
When the eighteen-year-old Rodolpho Guglielmi emigrated from
Italy to the United States in 1913, he came with no particular skills
apart from his good looks and his dancing prowess. To put these qualities to
advantage, he found work in the thes dansants, the Manhattan dance halls
where young girls would go alone or with friends and hire a taxi dancer for
a brief thrill. The taxi dancer would expertly twirl them around the dance
floor, flirting and chatting, all for a small fee. Guglielmi soon made a name
as one of the best—so graceful, poised, and pretty.
In working as a taxi dancer, Guglielmi spent a great deal of time around
women. He quickly learned what pleased them—how to mirror them in
subtle ways, how to put them at ease (but not too much). He began to pay
attention to his clothes, creating his own dapper look: he danced with a
corset under his shirt to give himself a trim figure, sported a wristwatch
(considered effeminate in those days), and claimed to be a marquis. In 1915,
he landed a job demonstrating the tango in fancy restaurants, and changed
his name to the more evocative Rodolpho di Valentina. A year later he
moved to Los Angeles: he wanted to try to make it in Hollywood.
Now known as Rudolph Valentino, Guglielmi appeared as an extra in
several low-budget pictures. He eventually landed a somewhat larger role in
the 1919 film Eyes of Youth, in which he played a seducer, and caught
women's attention by how different a seducer he was: his movements were
graceful and delicate, his skin so smooth and his face so pretty that when
he swooped down on his victim and drowned her protests with a kiss, he
seemed more thrilling than sinister. Next came The Four Horsemen of the
Apocalypse, in which Valentino played the male lead, Julio the playboy, and
became an overnight sex symbol through a tango sequence in which he se-
duced a young woman by leading her through the dance. The scene encap-
sulated the essence of his appeal: his feet smooth and fluid, his poise almost
feminine, combined with an air of control. Female members of the audi-
ence literally swooned as he raised a married woman's hands to his lips, or
shared the fragrance of a rose with his lover. He seemed so much more at-
tentive to women than other men did; but mixed in with this delicacy was
a hint of cruelty and menace that drove women wild.
In his most famous film, The Sheik, Valentino played an Arab prince
(later revealed to be a Scottish lord abandoned in the Sahara as a baby) who
rescues a proud English lady in the desert, then conquers her in a mannerOnce a son was born to
Mercury and the goddess
Venus, and he was brought
up by the naiads in Ida's
caves. In his features, it
was easy to trace
resemblance to his father
and to his mother. He was
called after them, too, for
his name was
Hermaphroditus. As soon
as he was fifteen, he left
his native hills, and Ida
where he had been brought
up, and for the sheer joy of
travelling visited remote
places. . . .He went as far
as the cities of Lycia, and
on to the Carians, who
dwell nearby. In this region
he spied a pool of water, so
clear that he could see right
to the bottom. . . . The
water was like crystal, and
the edges of the pool were
ringed with fresh turf and
grass that was always
green. A nymph
[Salmacis] dwelt
there. . . . Often she would
gather flowers, and it so
happened that she was
engaged in this pastime
when she caught sight of
the boy, Hermaphroditus.
As soon as she had seen
him, she longed to possess
him. . . .She addressed
him: "Fair boy, you surely
deserve to be thought a
43
44 • The Art of Seduction
that borders on rape. When she asks, "Why have you brought me here?,"
he replies, "Are you not woman enough to know?" Yet she ends up falling
in love with him, as indeed women did in movie audiences all over the
world, thrilling at his strange blend of the feminine and the masculine. In
one scene in The Sheik, the English lady points a gun at Valentino; his re-
sponse is to point a delicate cigarette holder back at her. She wears pants;
he wears long flowing robes and abundant eye makeup. Later films would
include scenes of Valentino dressing and undressing, a kind of striptease
showing glimpses of his trim body. In almost all of his films he played some
exotic period character—a Spanish bullfighter, an Indian rajah, an Arab
sheik, a French nobleman—and he seemed to delight in dressing up in jew-
els and tight uniforms.
In the 1920s, women were beginning to play with a new sexual free-
dom. Instead of waiting for a man to be interested in them, they wanted to
be able to initiate the affair, but they still wanted the man to end up sweep-
ing them off their feet. Valentino understood this perfectly. His off-screen
life corresponded to his movie image: he wore bracelets on his arm, dressed
impeccably, and reportedly was cruel to his wife, and hit her. (His adoring
public carefully ignored his two failed marriages and his apparently nonex-
istent sex life.) When he suddenly died—in New York in August 1926, at
the age of thirty-one, from complications after surgery for an ulcer—the
response was unprecedented: more than 100,000 people filed by his coffin,
many female mourners became hysterical, and the whole nation was spell-
bound. Nothing like this had happened before for a mere actor.
There is a film of Valentino's, Monsieur Beaucaire, in which he plays a total
fop, a much more effeminate role than he normally played, and without his
usual hint of dangerousness. The film was a flop. Women did not respond
to Valentino as a swish. They were thrilled by the ambiguity of a man who
shared many of their own feminine traits, yet remained a man. Valentino
dressed and played with his physicality like a woman, but his image was
masculine. He wooed as a woman would woo if she were a man—slowly,
attentively, paying attention to details, setting a rhythm instead of hurrying
to a conclusion. Yet when the time came for boldness and conquest, his
timing was impeccable, overwhelming his victim and giving her no chance
to protest. In his movies, Valentino practiced the same gigolo's art of leading
a woman on that he had mastered as a teenager on the dance floor—
chatting, flirting, pleasing, but always in control.
Valentino remains an enigma to this day. His private life and his charac-
ter are wrapped in mystery; his image continues to seduce as it did during
his lifetime. He served as the model for Elvis Presley, who was obsessed
with this star of the silents, and also for the modern male dandy who plays
with gender but retains an edge of danger and cruelty.
Seduction was and will always remain the female form of power and
warfare. It was originally the antidote to rape and violence. The man who
uses this form of power on a woman is in essence turning the game around,god. If you are, perhaps
you may be Cupid? . . . If
there is such a girl [engaged
to you], let me enjoy your
love in secret: but if there is
not, then I pray that I may
be your bride, and that we
may enter upon marriage
together." The naiad said
no more; but a blush
stained the boy's cheeks, for
he did not know what love
was. Even blushing became
him: his cheeks were the
colour of ripe apples,
hanging in a sunny orchard,
like painted ivory or like
the moon when, in eclipse,
she shows a reddish hue
beneath her brightness. . . .
Incessantly the nymph
demanded at least sisterly
kisses, and tried to put her
arms round his ivory neck.
"Will you stop!" he cried,
"or I shall run away and
leave this place and you!"
Salmacis was afraid: "1
yield the spot to you,
stranger, I shall not
intrude," she said; and,
turning from him, pretended
to go away. . . . The boy,
meanwhile, thinking
himself unobserved and
alone, strolled this way and
that on the grassy sward,
and dipped his toes in the
lapping water—then his
feet, up to the ankles.
Then, tempted by the
enticing coolness of the
waters, he quickly stripped
his young body of its soft
garments. At the sight,
Salmacis was spell-bound.
She was on fire with
passion to possess his
naked beauty, and her very
eyes flamed with a
brilliance like that of the
dazzling sun, when his
bright disc is reflected in a
mirror. . . . She longed to
embrace him then, and
with difficulty restrained
her frenzy.
Hermaphroditus, clapping
his hollow palms against
