226 • The Art of Seduction
stacles were immense: she was spied on day and night. Still, Saltykov man-
aged to befriend the young woman, and to enter her all-too-small circle.
He finally got her alone, and made it clear to her how well he understood
her loneliness, how deeply he disliked her husband, and how much he
shared her interest in the new ideas that were sweeping Europe. Soon he
found himself able to arrange further meetings, where he gave her the im-
pression that when he was with her, nothing else in the world mattered.
Catherine fell deeply in love with him, and he did in fact become her first
lover. Saltykov had entered her spirit.
When you mirror people, you focus intense attention on them. They
will sense the effort you are making, and will find it flattering. Obviously
you have chosen them, separating them out from the rest. There seems to
be nothing else in your life but them—their moods, their tastes, their spirit.
The more you focus on them, the deeper the spell you produce, and the in-
toxicating effect you have on their vanity.
Many of us have difficulty reconciling the person we are right now
with the person we want to be. We are disappointed that we have compro-
mised our youthful ideals, and we still imagine ourselves as that person
who had so much promise, but whom circumstances prevented from real-
izing it. When you are mirroring someone, do not stop at the person they
have become; enter the spirit of that ideal person they wanted to be. This
is how the French writer Chateaubriand managed to become a great se-
ducer, despite his physical ugliness. When he was growing up, in the latter
eighteenth century, romanticism was coming into fashion, and many
young women felt deeply oppressed by the lack of romance in their lives.
Chateaubriand would reawaken the fantasy they had had as young girls of
being swept off their feet, of fulfilling romantic ideals. This form of enter-
ing another's spirit is perhaps the most effective kind, because it makes peo-
ple feel better about themselves. In your presence, they live the life of the
person they had wanted to be—a great lover, a romantic hero, whatever it
is. Discover those crushed ideals and mirror them, bringing them back to
life by reflecting them back to your target. Few can resist such a lure.
Symbol: The
Hunter's Mirror. The lark is a sa-
vory bird, but difficult to catch. In the field, the
hunter places a mirror on a stand. The lark lands in
front of the glass, steps back and forth, entranced by its own
moving image and by the imitative mating dance it sees per-
formed before its eyes. Hypnotized, the bird loses all sense of its
surroundings, until the hunter's net traps it against the mirror.surely pardon his offence. "
• When he heard these
words, the old man burst
out laughing and said:
"For a long time I have
jested with all types of
men, but no one has ever
had the patience or the wit
to enter into my humors as
you have done. Now,
therefore, I pardon you,
and ask you in truth to cat
and drink with me, and to
he my companion as long
as I live. " • Then the old
man ordered his attendants
to serve all the dishes
which they had consumed
in fancy, and when he and
my brother had eaten their
fill they repaired to the
drinking chamber, where
beautiful young women
sang and made music. The
old Barmecide gave
Shakashik a robe of honor
and made him his constant
companion.
—"THE TALE OF SHAKASHIK,
THE BARBER'S SIXTH BROTHER,"
TALES FROM THE THOUSAND
AND ONE NIGHTS, TRANSLATED
BY N.J. DAWOOD
Enter Their Spirit • 227
Reversal
In 1897 in Berlin, the poet Rainer Maria Rilke, whose reputation would
later circle the world, met Lou Andreas-Salomé, the Russian-born writer
and beauty who was notorious for having broken Nietzsche's heart. She
was the darling of Berlin intellectuals, and although Rilke was twenty-two
and she was thirty-six, he fell head over heels in love with her. He flooded
her with love letters, which showed that he had read all her books and
knew her tastes intimately. The two became friends. Soon she was editing
his poetry, and he hung on her every word.
Salomé was flattered by Rilke's mirroring of her spirit, enchanted by
the intense attention he paid her and the spiritual communion they began
to develop. She became his lover. But she was worried about his future; it
was difficult to make a living as a poet, and she encouraged him to learn
her native language, Russian, and become a translator. He followed her ad-
vice so avidly that within months he could speak Russian. They visited
Russia together, and Rilke was overwhelmed by what he saw—the peas-
ants, the folk customs, the art, the architecture. Back in Berlin, he turned
his rooms into a kind of shrine to Russia, and started wearing Russian peas-
ant blouses and peppering his conversation with Russian phrases. Now the
charm of his mirroring soon wore off. At first Salomé had been flattered
that he shared her interests so intensely, but now she saw this as something
else: he seemed to have no real identity. He had become dependent on her
for his own self-esteem. It was all so slavish. In 1899, much to his horror,
she broke off the relationship.
The lesson is simple: your entry into a person's spirit must be a tactic, a
way to bring him or her under your spell. You cannot be simply a sponge,
soaking up the other person's moods. Mirror them for too long and they
will see through you and be repelled by you. Beneath the similarity to them
that you make them see, you must have a strong underlying sense of your
own identity. When the time comes, you will want to lead them into your
spirit; you cannot live on their turf. Never take mirroring too far, then. It is
only useful in the first phase of a seduction; at some point the dynamic
must be reversed.This desire for a double of
the other sex that resembles
us absolutely while still
being other, for a magical
creature who is ourself
while possessing the
advantage, over all our
imaginings, of an
autonomous existence. . . .
We find traces of it in even
the most banal
circumstances of love: in
the attraction linked to any
change, any disguise, as in
the importance of unison
and the repetition of self in
the other. . . . The great,
the implacable amorous
passions are all linked to
the fact that a being
imagines he sees his most
secret self spying upon him
behind the curtain of
another's eyes.
—ROBERT MUSIL, QUOTED IN
DENIS DE ROUGEMONT, LOVE
DECLARED, TRANSLATED BY
RICHARD HOWARD
