288 • The Art of Seduction
never experienced before: her virtue, her goodness, her beauty, her kind
ways had completely overwhelmed him. His generosity to the poor that
afternoon had been for her sake—perhaps inspired by her, perhaps some-
thing more sinister: it had been to impress her. He would never have con-
fessed to this, but finding himself alone with her, he could not control his
emotions. Then he got down on his knees and begged for her to help him,
to guide him in his misery.
The Présidente was caught off guard, and began to cry. Intensely em-
barrassed, she ran from the room, and for the next few days pretended to be
ill. She did not know how to react to the letters Valmont now began to
send her, begging her to forgive him. He praised her beautiful face and her
beautiful soul, and claimed she had made him rethink his whole life. These
emotional letters produced disturbing emotions, and Tourvel prided herself
on her calmness and prudence. She knew she should insist that he leave the
château, and wrote him to that effect; he reluctantly agreed, but on one
condition—that she allow him to write to her from Paris. She consented, as
long as the letters were not offensive. When he told Madame de Rose-
monde that he was leaving, the Présidente felt a pang of guilt: his host-
ess and aunt would miss him, and he looked so pale. He was obviously
suffering.
Now the letters from Valmont began to arrive, and Tourvel soon re-
gretted allowing him this liberty. He ignored her request that he avoid the
subject of love—indeed he vowed to love her forever. He rebuked her for
her coldness and insensitivity. He explained his bad path in life—it was not
his fault, he had had no direction, had been led astray by others. Without
her help he would fall back into that world. Do not be cruel, he said, you
are the one who seduced me. I am your slave, the victim of your charms
and goodness; since you are strong, and do not feel as I do, you have noth-
ing to fear. Indeed the Présidente de Tourvel came to pity Valmont—he
seemed so weak, so out of control. How could she help him? And why was
she even thinking of him, which she now did more and more? She was a
happily married woman. No, she must at least put an end to this tiresome
correspondence. No more talk of love, she wrote, or she would not reply.
His letters stopped coming. She felt relief. Finally some peace and quiet.
One evening, however, as she was seated at the dinner table, she sud-
denly heard Valmont's voice from behind her, addressing Madame de Rose-
monde. On the spur of the moment, he said, he had decided to return for
a short visit. She felt a shiver up and down her spine, her face flushed; he
approached and sat down beside her. He looked at her, she looked away,
and soon made an excuse to leave the table and go up to her room. But she
could not completely avoid him over the next few days, and she saw that he
seemed paler than ever. He was polite, and a whole day might pass without
her seeing him, but these brief absences had a paradoxical effect: now
Tourvel realized what had happened. She missed him, she wanted to see
him. This paragon of virtue and goodness had somehow fallen in love with
an incorrigible rake. Disgusted with herself and what she had allowed todisguise of a bedraggled
cuckoo and tenderly
warmed him in her bosom.
There he at once resumed
his true shape and ravished
her, so that she was
shamed into marrying him.
—ROBERT GRAVES,
THE GREEK MYTHS
In a strategy (?) of
seduction one draws the
other into one's area of
weakness, which is also his
or her area of weakness. A
calculated weakness, an
incalculable weakness: one
challenges the other to be
taken in....• To seduce
is to appear weak. To
seduce is to render weak.
We seduce with our
weakness, never with
strong signs or powers. In
seduction we enact this
weakness, and this is what
gives seduction its strength.
• We seduce with our
death, our vulnerability,
and with the void that
haunts us. The secret is to
know how to play with
death in the absence of a
gaze or gesture, in the
absence of knowledge or
meaning. • Psychoanalysis
tells us to assume our
fragility and passivity, but
in almost religious terms,
turns them into a form of
resignation and acceptance
in order to promote a well-
tempered psychic
equilibrium. Seduction, by
contrast, plays trumph-
antty with weakness,
making a game of it, with
its own rules.
—JEAN BAUDRILLARD,
SEDUCTION, TRANSLATED BY
BRIAN SINGER
Disarm Through Strategic Weakness and Vulnerability • 289
happen, she left the château in the middle of the night, without telling
anyone, and headed for Paris, where she planned somehow to repent this
awful sin.
Interpretation. The character of Valmont in Choderlos de Laclos's
epistolary novel Dangerous Liaisons is based on several of the great real-life
libertines of eighteenth-century France. Everything Valmont does is calcu-
lated for effect—the ambiguous actions that make Tourvel curious about
him, the act of charity in the village (he knows he is being followed), the
return visit to the château, the paleness of his face (he is having an affair
with a girl at the château, and their all-night carousals give him a wasted
look). Most devastating of all is his positioning of himself as the weak one,
the seduced, the victim. How can the Présidente imagine he is manipulat-
ing her when everything suggests he is simply overwhelmed by her beauty,
whether physical or spiritual? He cannot be a deceiver when he repeatedly
makes a point of confessing the "truth" about himself: he admits that his
charity was questionably motivated, he explains why he has gone astray, he
lets her in on his emotions. (All of this "honesty," of course, is calculated.)
In essence he is like a woman, or at least like a woman of those times—
emotional, unable to control himself, moody, insecure. She is the one who
is cold and cruel, like a man. In positioning himself as Tourvel's victim, Val-
mont can not only disguise his manipulations but elicit pity and concern.
Playing the victim, he can stir up the tender emotions produced by a sick
child or a wounded animal. And these emotions are easily channeled into
love—as the Présidente discovers to her dismay.
Seduction is a game of reducing suspicion and resistance. The cleverest
way to do this is to make the other person feel stronger, more in control of
things. Suspicion usually comes out of insecurity; if your targets feel supe-
rior and secure in your presence, they are unlikely to doubt your motives.
You are too weak, too emotional, to be up to something. Take this game as
far as it will go. Flaunt your emotions and how deeply they have affected
you. Making people feel the power they have over you is immensely flatter-
ing to them. Confess to something bad, or even to something bad that you
did, or contemplated doing, to them. Honesty is more important than
virtue, and one honest gesture will blind them to many deceitful acts. Cre-
ate an impression of weakness—physical, mental, emotional. Strength and
confidence can be frightening. Make your weakness a comfort, and play
the victim—of their power over you, of circumstances, of life in general.
This is the best way to cover your tracks.
You know, a man ain't worth a damn if he can't cry at the
right time.
—LYNDON BAINES JOHNSONThe old American proverb
says if you want to con
someone, you must first get
him to trust you, or at least
feel superior to you (these
two ideas are related), and
get him to let down his
guard. The proverb
explains a great deal about
television commercials. If
we assume that people are
not stupid, they must react
to TV commercials with a
feeling of superiority that
permits them to believe
they are in control. As long
as this illusion of volition
persists, they would
consciously have nothing to
fear from the commercials.
People are prone to trust
anything over which they
believe they have
control. . . . • TV com-
mercials appear foolish,
clumsy, and ineffectual on
purpose. They are made to
appear this way at the
conscious level in order to
be consciously ridiculed and
rejected. . . . Most ad men
will confirm that over the
years the seemingly worst
commercials have sold the
best. An effective TV
commercial is purposefully
designed to insult the
viewer's conscious
intelligence, thereby
penetrating his defenses.
—WILSON BRYAN KEY,
SUBLIMINAL SEDUCTION
It takes great art to use
bashfulness, but one does
achieve a great deal with it.
How often I have used
bashfulness to trick a little
miss! Ordinarily, young
girls speak very harshly
about bashful men, but
secretly they like them. A
little bashfulness flatters a
teenage girl's vanity, makes
her feel superior; it is her
