The Anti-Seducer • 135
trait of all, and you cannot allow yourself to give in to it. Most tightwads
do not realize they have a problem; they actually imagine that when they
give someone some paltry crumb, they are being generous. Take a hard
look at yourself—you are probably cheaper than you think. Try giving
more freely of both your money and yourself and you will see the seduc-
tive potential in selective generosity. Of course you must keep your gener-
osity under control. Giving too much can be a sign of desperation, as if
you were trying to buy someone.
The Bumbler. Bumblers are self-conscious, and their self-consciousness
heightens your own. At first you may think they are thinking about you,
and so much so that it makes them awkward. In fact they are only thinking
of themselves—worrying about how they look, or about the consequences
for them of their attempt to seduce you. Their worry is usually contagious:
soon you are worrying too, about yourself. Bumblers rarely reach the final
stages of a seduction, but if they get that far, they bungle that too. In se-
duction, the key weapon is boldness, refusing the target the time to stop
and think. Bumblers have no sense of timing. You might find it amusing
to try to train or educate them, but if they are still Bumblers past a certain
age, the case is probably hopeless—they are incapable of getting outside
themselves.
The Windbag. The most effective seductions are driven by looks, indirect
actions, physical lures. Words have a place, but too much talk will generally
break the spell, heightening surface differences and weighing things down.
People who talk a lot most often talk about themselves. They have never
acquired that inner voice that wonders, Am I boring you? To be a Windbag
is to have a deep-rooted selfishness. Never interrupt or argue with these
types—that only fuels their windbaggery. At all costs learn to control your
own tongue.
The Reactor. Reactors are far too sensitive, not to you but to their own
egos. They comb your every word and action for signs of a slight to their
vanity. If you strategically back off, as you sometimes must in seduction,
they will brood and lash out at you. They are prone to whining and com-
plaining, two very anti-seductive traits. Test them by telling a gentle joke or
story at their expense: we should all be able to laugh at ourselves a little, but
the Reactor cannot. You can read the resentment in their eyes. Erase any
reactive qualities in your own character—they unconsciously repel people.
The Vulgarian. Vulgarians are inattentive to the details that are so impor-
tant in seduction. You can see this in their personal appearance—theiror sees that he has no
patience, or is stained with
the vice of pride. There is
nothing which appears
more appropriate to the
character of any lover than
to be clad in the adornment
of humility, utterly
untouched by the
nakedness of pride. • Then
too the prolixity of a fool
or a madman often
diminishes love. There arc
many keen to prolong their
crazy words in the presence
of a woman, thinking that
they please her if they
employ foolish, ill-judged
language, but in fact they
are strangely deceived.
Indeed, he who thinks that
his foolish behavior pleases
a wise woman suffers from
the greatest poverty of
sense.
—ANDREAS CAPELLANUS,"HOW
LOVE IS DIMINISHED,"
TRANSLATED BY P. G.WALSH
Real men \ Shouldn't
primp their good
looks. . . . \ Keep
pleasantly clean, take
exercise, work up an
outdoor \ Tan; make quite
sure that your toga fits \
And doesn't show spots;
don't lace your shoes too
tightly \ Or ignore any
rusty buckles, or slop \
Around in too large a
fitting. Don't let some
incompetent barber \ Ruin
your looks: both hair and
beard demand \ Expert
attention. Keep your nails
pared, and dirt-free; \
Don't let those long hairs
sprout \ In your nostrils,
make sure your breath is
never offensive, \ Avoid the
rank male stench \ That
wrinkles noses. . . . \ I was
about to warn you
[women] against rank
goatish armpits \ And
bristling hair on your legs, \
136 • The Art of Seduction
clothes are tasteless by any standard—and in their actions: they do not
know that it is sometimes better to control oneself and refuse to give in to
one's impulses. Vulgarians will blab, saying anything in public. They have
no sense of timing and are rarely in harmony with your tastes. Indiscretion
is a sure sign of the Vulgarian (talking to others of your affair, for example);
it may seem impulsive, but its real source is their radical selfishness, their in-
ability to see themselves as others see them. More than just avoiding Vul-
garians, you must make yourself their opposite—tact, style, and attention to
detail are all basic requirements of a seducer.
Examples of the Anti-Seducer
1. Claudius, the step-grandson of the great Roman emperor Augustus, was
considered something of an imbecile as a young man, and was treated badly
by almost everyone in his family. His nephew Caligula, who became em-
peror in A.D. 37, made it a sport to torture him, making him run around
the palace at top speed as penance for his stupidity, having soiled sandals
tied to his hands at supper, and so on. As Claudius grew older, he seemed
to become even more slow-witted, and while all of his relatives lived under
the constant threat of assassination, he was left alone. So it came as a great
surprise to everyone, including Claudius himself, that when, in A.D. 41, a
cabal of soldiers assassinated Caligula, they also proclaimed Claudius em-
peror. Having no desire to rule, he delegated most of the governing to
confidantes (a group of freed slaves) and spent his time doing what he loved
best: eating, drinking, gambling, and whoring.
Claudius's wife, Valeria Messalina, was one of the most beautiful
women in Rome. Although he seemed fond of her, Claudius paid her no
attention, and she started to have affairs. At first she was discreet, but over
the years, provoked by her husband's neglect, she became more and more
debauched. She had a room built for her in the palace where she enter-
tained scores of men, doing her best to imitate the most notorious prosti-
tute in Rome, whose name was written on the door. Any man who refused
her advances was put to death. Almost everyone in Rome knew about
these frolics, but Claudius said nothing; he seemed oblivious.
So great was Messalina's passion for her favorite lover, Gaius Silius, that
she decided to marry him, although both of them were married already.
While Claudius was away, they held a wedding ceremony, authorized by a
marriage contract that Claudius himself had been tricked into signing. Af-
ter the ceremony, Gaius moved into the palace. Now the shock and disgust
of the whole city finally forced Claudius into action, and he ordered the
execution of Gaius and of Messalina's other lovers—but not of Messalina
herself. Nevertheless, a gang of soldiers, inflamed by the scandal, hunted
her down and stabbed her to death. When this was reported to the em-
peror, he merely ordered more wine and continued his meal. Several nightsBut I'm not instructing
hillbilly girls from the
Caucasus, \ Or Mysian
river-hoydens—so what
need \ To remind you not
to let your teeth get all
discolored \ Through
neglect, or forget to wash \
Your hands every morning?
You know how to brighten
your complexion \ With
powder, add rouge to a
bloodless face, \ Skillfully
block in the crude outline
of an eyebrow, \ Stick a
patch on one flawless
cheek. \ You don't shrink
from lining your eyes with
dark mascara \ Or a touch
of Cilician saffron. . . . \
But don't let your lover
find all those jars and
bottles \ On your dressing-
table: the best \ Makeup
remains unobtrusive. A
face so thickly plastered \
With pancake it runs
down your sweaty neck \ Is
bound to create repulsion.
And that goo from
unwashed fleeces— \
Athenian maybe, but my
dear, the smell!— \ That's
used for face-cream: avoid
it. When you have
company \ Don't dab stuff
on your pimples, don't start
cleaning your teeth: \ The
result may be attractive, but
the process is
sickening. . . .
—OVID, THE ART OF LOVE,
TRANSLATED BY PETER GREEN
