Beware the Aftereffects • 423
husband would not spoil the illusion. Ellington was never defensive or
apologetic about his appetite for women; it was his nature and never the
fault of the woman that he was unfaithful. And if he could not help his de-
sires, how could she hold him responsible? It was impossible to hold a
grudge against such a man or complain about his behavior.
Ellington was an Aesthetic Rake, a type whose obsession with women
can only be satisfied by endless variety. A normal man's tomcatting will
eventually land him in hot water, but the Aesthetic Rake rarely stirs up ugly
emotions. After he seduces a woman, there is neither an integration nor a
sacrifice. He keeps them hanging and hoping. The spell is not broken the
next day, because the Aesthetic Rake makes the separation a pleasant, even
elegant experience. The spell Ellington cast on a woman never went away.
The lesson is simple: keep the moments after the seduction and the
separation in the same key as before, heightened, aesthetic, and pleasant. If
you do not act guilty for your feckless behavior, it is hard for the other per-
son to feel angry or resentful. Seduction is a lighthearted game, in which
you invest all of your energy in the moment. The separation should be
lighthearted and stylish as well: it is work, travel, some dreaded responsi-
bility that calls you away. Create a memorable experience and then move
on, and your victim will most likely remember the delightful seduction,
not the separation. You will have made no enemies, and will have a lifelong
harem of lovers to whom you can always return when you feel so inclined.
4. In 1899, twenty-year-old Baroness Frieda von Richthofen married an
Englishman named Ernest Weekley, a professor at the University of Not-
tingham, and soon settled into the role of the professor's wife. Weekley
treated her well, but she grew bored with their quiet life and his tepid love-
making. On trips home to Germany she had a few love affairs, but this
wasn't what she wanted either, and so she returned to being faithful and
caring for their three children.
One day in 1912, a former student of Weekley's, David Herbert
Lawrence, paid a visit to the couple's house. A struggling writer, Lawrence
wanted the professor's professional advice. He was not home yet so Frieda
entertained him. She had never met such an intense young man. He talked
of his impoverished youth, his inability to understand women. And he lis-
tened attentively to her own complaints. He even scolded her for the bad
tea she had made him—somehow, even though she was a baroness, this ex-
cited her.
Lawrence returned for later visits, but now to see Frieda, not Weekley.
One day he confessed to her that he had fallen deeply in love with her. She
admitted to similar feelings, and proposed they find a trysting spot. Instead
Lawrence had a proposal of his own: Leave your husband tomorrow—leave
him for me. What about the children? Frieda asked. If the children are
more important than our love, Lawrence replied, then stay with them. But
if you don't run away with me within a few days, you will never see mewrath when roused may
harden indefinitely. Love
again experiences increase
when genuine jealousy
preoccupies one of the
lovers, for jealousy is called
the nurturer of love. In fact
even if the lover is
oppressed not by genuine
jealousy but by base
suspicion, love always
increases because of it, and
becomes more powerful by
its own strength.
—ANDREAS CAPELLANUS
ON LOVE, TRANSLATED
BY P. G. WALSH
You've seen the fire that
smolders \ Down to
nothing, grows a crown of
pale ash \ Over its hidden
embers (yet a sprinkling of
sulphur \ Will suffice to
rekindle the flame)? \ So
with the heart. It grows
torpid from lack of worry, \
Needs a sharp stimulus to
elicit love. \ Get her
anxious about you, reheat
her tepid passions, \ Tell
her your guilty secrets,
watch her blanch. \ Thrice
fortunate that man, lucky
past calculation, \ Who can
make some poor injured
girl \ Torture herself over
him, lose voice, go pale,
pass out when \ The
unwelcome news reaches
her. Ah, may I \ Be the
one whose hair she tears
out in her fury, the one
whose \ Soft cheeks she rips
with her nails, \ Whom she
sees, eyes glaring, through
a rain of tears; without
whom, \ Try as she will,
she cannot live! \ How long
(you may ask) should you
leave her lamenting her
wrong? A little \ While
only, lest rage gather
strength \ Through
procrastination. By then
you should have her
sobbing \ All over your
424 • The Art of Seduction
again. To Frieda the choice was horrific. She did not care at all about her
husband, but the children were what she lived for. Even so, a few days later,
she succumbed to Lawrence's proposal. How could she resist a man who
was willing to ask for so much, to take such a gamble? If she refused she
would always wonder, for such a man only passes once through your life.
The couple left England and headed for Germany. Frieda would men-
tion sometimes how much she missed her children, but Lawrence had no
patience with her: You are free to go back to them at any moment, he
would say, but if you stay, don't look back. He took her on an arduous
mountaineering trip in the Alps. A baroness, she had never experienced
such hardship, but Lawrence was firm: if two people are in love, why should
comfort matter?
In 1914, Frieda and Lawrence were married, but over the following
years the same pattern repeated. He would scold her for her laziness, the
nostalgia for her children, her abysmal housekeeping. He would take her
on trips around the world, on very little money, never letting her settle
down, although it was her fondest wish. They fought and fought. Once in
New Mexico, in front of friends, he yelled at her, "Take that dirty cigarette
out of your mouth! And stop sticking out that fat belly of yours!" "You'd
better stop that talk or I'll tell about your things," she yelled back. (She had
learned to give him a taste of his own medicine.) They both went outside.
Their friends watched, worried it might turn violent. They disappeared from
sight only to reappear moments later, arm in arm, laughing and mooning
over one another. That was the most disconcerting thing about the Law-
rences: married for years, they often behaved like infatuated newlyweds.
Interpretation. When Lawrence first met Frieda, he could sense right away
what her weakness was: she felt trapped, in a stultifying relationship and a
pampered life. Her husband, like so many husbands, was kind, but never
paid enough attention to her. She craved drama and adventure, but was too
lazy to get it on her own. Drama and adventure were just what Lawrence
would provide. Instead of feeling trapped, she had the freedom to leave
him at any moment. Instead of ignoring her, he criticized her constantly—
at least he was paying attention, never taking her for granted. Instead of
comfort and boredom, he gave her adventure and romance. The fights he
picked with ritualistic frequency also ensured nonstop drama and the space
for a powerful reconciliation. He inspired a touch of fear in her, which
kept her off balance, never quite sure of him. As a result, the relationship
never grew stale. It kept renewing itself.
If it is integration you are after, seduction must never stop. Otherwise
boredom will creep in. And the best way to keep the process going is often
to inject intermittent drama. This can be painful—opening old wounds,
stirring up jealousy, withdrawing a little. (Do not confuse this behavior
with nagging or carping criticism—this pain is strategic, designed to break
up rigid patterns.) On the other hand it can also be pleasant: think aboutchest, your arms tight
around her neck. \ You
want peace? Give her
kisses, make love to the girl
while she's crying— \
That's the only way to
melt her angry mood.
—OVID, THE ART OF LOVE,
TRANSLATED BY PETER GREEN
