258 • The Art of Seduction
direct. Better to suggest the effect your target has on you than to gush
about how you feel. Stay vague and ambiguous, allowing the reader the
space to imagine and fantasize. The goal of your writing is not to ex-
press yourself but to create emotion in the reader, spreading confusion and
desire.
You will know that your letters are having the proper effect when your
targets come to mirror your thoughts, repeating words you wrote, whether
in their own letters or in person. This is the time to move to the more
physical and erotic. Use language that quivers with sexual connotation, or,
better still, suggest sexuality by making your letters shorter, more frequent,
and even more disordered than before. There is nothing more erotic than
the short abrupt note. Your thoughts are unfinished; they can only be com-
pleted by the other person.
Sganarelle to Don Juan: Well, what I have to say is . . . I
don't know what to say; for you turn things in such a
manner with your words, that it seems that you are right;
and yet, the truth of it is, you are not. I had the finest
thoughts in the world, and your words have totally scram-
bled them up.
—MOLIÈRE
Keys to Seduction
We rarely think before we talk. It is human nature to say the first thing
that comes into our head—and usually what comes first is some-
thing about ourselves. We primarily use words to express our own feelings,
ideas, and opinions. (Also to complain and to argue.) This is because we are
generally self-absorbed—the person who interests us most is our own self.
To a certain extent this is inevitable, and through much of our lives there is
nothing much wrong with it; we can function quite well this way. In se-
duction, however, it limits our potential.
You cannot seduce without an ability to get outside your own skin and
inside another person's, piercing their psychology. The key to seductive
language is not the words you utter, or your seductive tone of voice; it is a
radical shift in perspective and habit. You have to stop saying the first thing
that comes to your mind—you have to control the urge to prattle and vent
your opinions. The key is to see words as a tool not for communicating
true thoughts and feelings but for confusing, delighting, and intoxicating.
The difference between normal language and seductive language is like
the difference between noise and music. Noise is a constant in modern life,
something irritating we tune out if we can. Our normal language is like
noise—people may half-listen to us as we go on about ourselves, but just as
often their thoughts are a million miles away. Every now and then their ears
prick up when something we say touches on them, but this lasts only untilAnd Zeus, who masses the
clouds, replied: \ "Hera,
don't worry about any god
or man \ Seeing us. I'll
enfold you in a cloud so
dense \ And golden not
even Helios could spy on
us, \ And his light is the
sharpest vision there is."
—HOMER, THE ILIAD,
TRANSLATED BY STANLEY
LOMBARDO
ANTONY: Friends,
Romans, countrymen, lend
me your ears; \ I come to
bury Caesar, not to praise
him. \ The evil that men
do lives after them; \ The
good is oft interred with
their bones. \ So let it be
with Caesar. . . . \ I speak
not to disprove what
Brutus spoke, \ But here I
am to speak what I do
know. \ You all did love
him once, not without
cause. \ What cause
withholds you then to
mourn for him? \ O
judgment, thou art fled to
brutish beasts, \ And men
have lost their reason! Bear
with me. \ My heart is in
the coffin there with Caesar,
\And I must pause till it
come back to me. . . . \
PLEBEIAN: Poor soul! his
eyes are red as fire with
weeping. \ PLEBEIAN:
There's not a nobler man
in Rome than Antony. \
PLEBEIAN: Now mark
him. He begins again to
speak. \ ANTONY: But
yesterday the word of
Caesar might \ Have stood
against the world. Now
lies he there, \ And none so
poor to do him reverence. \
O masters! If I were
disposed to stir \ Your
hearts and minds to
mutiny and rage, \ I should
do Brutus wrong, and
Cassius wrong, \ Who,
you all know, are
Use the Demonic Power of Words to Sow Confusion • 259
we return to yet another story about ourselves. As early as childhood we
learn to tune out this kind of noise (particularly when it comes from our
parents).
Music, on the other hand, is seductive, and gets under our skin. It is in-
tended for pleasure. A melody or rhythm stays in our blood for days after we
have heard it, altering our moods and emotions, relaxing or exciting us. To
make music instead of noise, you must say things that please—things that re-
late to people's lives, that touch their vanity. If they have many problems,
you can produce the same effect by distracting them, focusing their attention
away from themselves by saying things that are witty and entertaining, or
that make the future seem bright and hopeful. Promises and flattery are mu-
sic to anyone's ears. This is language designed to move people and lower
their resistance. It is language designed for them, not directed at them.
The Italian writer Gabriele D'Annunzio was physically unattractive, yet
women could not resist him. Even those who knew of his Don Juan repu-
tation and disliked him for it (the actress Eleanora Duse and the dancer
Isadora Duncan, for instance) fell under his spell. The secret was the flow of
words in which he enveloped a woman. His voice was musical, his language
poetic, and most devastating of all, he knew how to flatter. His flattery was
aimed precisely at a woman's weaknesses, the areas where she needed vali-
dation. A woman was beautiful, yet lacked confidence in her own wit and
intelligence? He made sure to say that he was bewitched not by her beauty
but by her mind. He might compare her to a heroine of literature, or to a
carefully chosen mythological figure. Talking to him, her ego would dou-
ble in size.
Flattery is seductive language in its purest form. Its purpose is not to
express a truth or a real feeling, but only to create an effect on the recipient.
Like D'Annunzio, learn to aim your flattery directly at a person's insecuri-
ties. For instance, if a man is a fine actor and feels confident about his pro-
fessional skills, to flatter him about his acting will have little effect, and may
even accomplish the opposite—he could feel that he is above the need to
have his ego stroked, and your flattery will seem to say otherwise. But let us
say that this actor is an amateur musician or painter. He does this work on
his own, without professional support or publicity, and he is well aware that
others make their living at it. Flattery of his artistic pretensions will go
straight to his head and earn you double points. Learn to sniff out the parts
of a person's ego that need validation. Make it a surprise, something no one
else has thought to flatter before—something you can describe as a talent or
positive quality that others have not noticed. Speak with a little tremor, as if
your target's charms had overwhelmed you and made you emotional.
Flattery can be a kind of verbal foreplay. Aphrodite's powers of seduc-
tion, which were said to come from the magnificent girdle she wore, in-
volved a sweetness of language—a skill with the soft, flattering words that
prepare the way for erotic thoughts. Insecurities and nagging self-doubts
have a dampening effect on the libido. Make your targets feel secure and al-
luring through your flattering words and their resistance will melt away.honorable men. \ I will not
do them wrong. . . . \ But
here's a parchment with the
seal of Caesar. \ I found it
in his closet; 'tis his will. \
Let but the commons hear
this testament, \ Which
(pardon me) I do not mean
to read, \And they would
go and kiss dead Caesar's
wounds \ And dip their
napkins in his sacred
blood. . . . \ PLEBEIAN:
We'll hear the will! Read
it, Mark Antony. \ ALL:
The will, the will! We will
hear Caesar's will! \
ANTONY: Have patience,
gentle friends; I must not
read it. \ It is not meet you
know how Caesar loved
you. \ You are not wood,
you are not stones, but
men; \ And being men,
hearing the will of Caesar,
\ It will inflame you, it
will make you mad. \ 'Tis
good you know not that
you are his heirs; \ For if
you should, O, what
would come of it? . . . \ If
you have tears, prepare to
shed them now. \ You all
do know this mantle. I
remember \ The first time
ever Caesar put it on. . . .
\ Look, in this place ran
Cassius' dagger through. \
See what a rent the
envious Casca made. \
Through this the well-
beloved Brutus stabbed; \
And as he plucked his
cursed steel away, \ Mark
how the blood of Caesar
followed it. . . . \ For
Brutus, as you know, was
Caesar's angel. \ Judge, O
you gods, how dearly
Caesar loved him! \ This
was the most unkindest cut
of all; \ For when the noble
Caesar saw him stab, \
Ingratitude, more strong
than traitors' arms, \ Quite
vanquished him. . . . \ O,
now you weep, and I
perceive you feel \ The dint
of pity. These are gracious
