24 • The Art of Seduction
feet. The words of the Rake are the equivalent of the bodily adornment of
the Siren: a powerful sensual distraction, a narcotic. The Rake's use of lan-
guage is demonic because it is designed not to communicate or convey in-
formation but to persuade, flatter, stir emotional turmoil, much as the
serpent in the Garden of Eden used words to lead Eve into temptation.
The example of D'Annunzio reveals the link between the erotic Rake,
who seduces women, and the political Rake, who seduces the masses. Both
depend on words. Adapt the character of the Rake and you will find that
the use of words as a subtle poison has infinite applications. Remember: it
is the form that matters, not the content. The less your targets focus on
what you say, and the more on how it makes them feel, the more seductive
your effect. Give your words a lofty, spiritual, literary flavor the better to in-
sinuate desire in your unwitting victims.
But what is this force, then, by which Don Juan seduces?
It is desire, the energy of sensuous desire. He desires in
every woman the whole of womanhood. The reaction to
this gigantic passion beautifies and develops the one de-
sired, who flushes in enhanced beauty by his reflection. As
the enthusiast's fire with seductive splendor illumines even
those who stand in a casual relation to him, so Don Juan
transfigures in a far deeper sense every girl.
—SØREN KIERKEGAARD, EITHER/OR
Keys to the Character
At first it may seem strange that a man who is clearly dishonest, disloyal,
and has no interest in marriage would have any appeal to a woman.
But throughout all of history, and in all cultures, this type has had a fatal ef-
fect. What the Rake offers is what society normally does not allow women:
an affair of pure pleasure, an exciting brush with danger. A woman is often
deeply oppressed by the role she is expected to play She is supposed to be
the tender, civilizing force in society, and to want commitment and lifelong
loyalty. But often her marriages and relationships give her not romance and
devotion but routine and an endlessly distracted mate. It remains an abiding
female fantasy to meet a man who gives totally of himself, who lives for
her, even if only for a while.
This dark, repressed side of female desire found expression in the leg-
end of Don Juan. At first the legend was a male fantasy: the adventurous
knight who could have any woman he wanted. But in the seventeenth and
eighteenth centuries, Don Juan slowly evolved from the masculine adven-
turer to a more feminized version: a man who lived only for women. This
evolution came from women's interest in the story, and was a result of their
frustrated desires. Marriage for them was a form of indentured servitude;
but Don Juan offered pleasure for its own sake, desire with no strings at-
The Rake • 25
tached. For the time he crossed your path, you were all he thought about.
His desire for you was so powerful that he gave you no time to think or to
worry about the consequences. He would come in the night, give you an
unforgettable moment, and then vanish. He might have conquered a thou-
sand women before you, but that only made him more interesting; better to
be abandoned than undesired by such a man.
The great seducers do not offer the mild pleasures that society con-
dones. They touch a person's unconscious, those repressed desires that cry
out for liberation. Do not imagine that women are the tender creatures that
some people would like them to be. Like men, they are deeply attracted to
the forbidden, the dangerous, even the slightly evil. (Don Juan ends by go-
ing to hell, and the word "rake" comes from "rakehell," a man who rakes
the coals of hell; the devilish component, clearly, is an important part of
the fantasy.) Always remember: if you are to play the Rake, you must con-
vey a sense of risk and darkness, suggesting to your victim that she is partici-
pating in something rare and thrilling—a chance to play out her own rakish
desires.
To play the Rake, the most obvious requirement is the ability to let
yourself go, to draw a woman into the kind of purely sensual moment in
which past and future lose meaning. You must be able to abandon yourself
to the moment. (When the Rake Valmont—a character modeled after the
Duke de Richelieu—in Laclos' eighteenth-century novel Dangerous Liaisons
writes letters that are obviously calculated to have a certain effect on his
chosen victim, Madame de Tourvel, she sees right through them; but when
his letters really do burn with passion, she begins to relent.) An added
benefit of this quality is that it makes you seem unable to control yourself, a
display of weakness that a woman enjoys. By abandoning yourself to the
seduced, you make them feel that you exist for them alone—a feeling re-
flecting a truth, though a temporary one. Of the hundreds of women that
Pablo Picasso, consummate rake, seduced over the years, most of them had
the feeling that they were the only one he truly loved.
The Rake never worries about a woman's resistance to him, or for that
matter about any other obstacle in his path—a husband, a physical barrier.
Resistance is only the spur to his desire, enflaming him all the more. When
Picasso was seducing Françoise Gilot, in fact, he begged her to resist; he
needed resistance to add to the thrill. In any case, an obstacle in your way
gives you the opportunity to prove yourself, and the creativity you bring to
matters of love. In the eleventh-century Japanese novel The Tale of Genji, by
the court lady Murasaki Shikibu, the Rake Prince Niou is not disturbed by
the sudden disappearance of Ukifune, the woman he loves. She has fled be-
cause although she is interested in the prince, she is in love with another
man; but her absence allows the prince to go to extreme lengths to track
her down. His sudden appearance to whisk her away to a house deep in the
woods, and the gallantry he displays in doing so, overwhelm her. Remem-
ber: if no resistances or obstacles face you, you must create them. No se-
duction can proceed without them.
