298 • The Art of Seduction
The two men became friends. Chinese contact with foreigners was re-
stricted, but they managed to find ways to meet. One evening Bouriscout
tagged along when Pei Pu visited the home of a French official to tutor the
children. He listened as Pei Pu told them "The Story of the Butterfly," a
tale from the Chinese opera: a young girl yearns to attend an imperial
school, but girls are not accepted there. She disguises herself as a boy, passes
the exams, and enters the school. A fellow student falls in love with her,
and she is attracted to him, so she tells him that she is actually a girl. Like
most of these tales, the story ends tragically. Pei Pu told it with unusual
emotion; in fact he had played the role of the girl in the opera.
A few nights later, as they were walking before the gates of the Forbid-
den City, Pei Pu returned to "The Story of the Butterfly" "Look at my
hands," he said, "Look at my face. That story of the butterfly, it is my story
too." In his slow, dramatic delivery he explained that his mother's first two
children had been girls. Sons were far more important in China; if the third
child was a girl, the father would have to take a second wife. The third child
came: another girl. But the mother was too frightened to reveal the truth,
and made an agreement with the midwife: they would say that the child
was a boy, and it would be raised as such. This third child was Pei Pu.
Over the years, Pei Pu had had to go to extreme lengths to disguise her
sex. She never used public bathrooms, plucked her hairline to look as if she
were balding, on and on. Bouriscout was enthralled by the story, and also
relieved, for like the boy in the butterfly tale, deep down he felt attracted to
Pei Pu. Now everything made sense—the small hands, the high-pitched
voice, the delicate neck. He had fallen in love with her, and, it seemed, the
feelings were reciprocated.
Pei Pu started visiting Bouriscout's apartment, and soon they were
sleeping together. She continued to dress as a man, even in his apartment,
but women in China wore men's clothes anyway, and Pei Pu acted more
like a woman than any of the Chinese women he had seen. In bed, she had
a shyness and a way of directing his hands that was both exciting and femi-
nine. She made everything romantic and heightened. When he was away
from her, her every word and gesture resonated in his mind. What made
the affair all the more exciting was the fact that they had to keep it secret.
In December of 1965, Bouriscout left Beijing and returned to Paris. He
traveled, had other affairs, but his thoughts kept returning to Pei Pu. The
Cultural Revolution broke out in China, and he lost contact with her. Be-
fore he had left, she had told him she was pregnant with their child. He had
no idea whether the baby had been born. His obsession with her grew too
strong, and in 1969 he finagled another government job in Beijing.
Contact with foreigners was now even more discouraged than on his
first visit, but he managed to track Pei Pu down. She told him she had
borne a son, in 1966, but he had looked like Bouriscout, and given the
growing hatred of foreigners in China, and the need to keep the secret of
her sex, she had him sent him away to an isolated region near Russia. It was
so cold there—perhaps he was dead. She showed Bouriscout photographsinfluence with Napoleon in
connection with providing
for the needs of the French
troops in the Papal States.
He made an instantaneous
impression on the princess,
who escorted him around
her garden until they
arrived at the rockery.
There she stopped and,
looking into the young
man's eyes mysteriously,
commanded him to return
to this same spot at the
same hour next day when
she might have some good
news for him. The young
officer bowed and took his
leave. . . . In his memoirs
he revealed in detail what
took place after the first
meeting with Pauline: •
"At the hour agreed on I
again proceeded to Neuilly,
made my way to the
appointed spot in the
garden and stood waiting
at the rockery. I had not
been there very long when
a lady made her
appearance, greeted me
pleasantly and led me
through a side door into the
interior of the rockery
where there were several
rooms and galleries and in
one splendid salon a
luxurious-looking bath.
The adventure was
beginning to strike me as
very romantic, almost like
a fairy tale, and just as I
was wondering what the
outcome might be a woman
in a robe of the sheerest
cambric entered by a side
door, came up to me, and
smilingly asked how I liked
being there. I at once
recognized Napoleon's
beautiful sister, whose
perfect figure was clearly
outlined by every
movement of her robe. She
held out her hand for me to
kiss and told me to sit
down on the couch beside
her. On this occasion I
certainly was not the
Confuse Desire and Reality—The Perfect Illusion • 299
of the boy, and he did see some resemblance. Over the next few weeks they
managed to meet here and there, and then Bouriscout had an idea: he sym-
pathized with the Cultural Revolution, and he wanted to get around the
prohibitions that were preventing him from seeing Pei Pu, so he offered to
do some spying. The offer was passed along to the right people, and soon
Bouriscout was stealing documents for the Communists. The son, named
Bertrand, was recalled to Beijing, and Bouriscout finally met him. Now a
threefold adventure filled Bouriscout's life: the alluring Pei Pu, the thrill of
being a spy, and the illicit child, whom he wanted to bring back to France.
In 1972, Bouriscout left Beijing. Over the next few years he tried
repeatedly to get Pei Pu and his son to France, and a decade later he fi-
nally succeeded; the three became a family In 1983, though, the French
authorities grew suspicious of this relationship between a Foreign Office
official and a Chinese man, and with a little investigating they uncovered
Bouriscout's spying. He was arrested, and soon made a startling confession:
the man he was living with was really a woman. Confused, the French or-
dered an examination of Pei Pu; as they had thought, he was very much a
man. Bouriscout went to prison.
Even after Bouriscout had heard his former lover's own confession, he
was still convinced that Pei Pu was a woman. Her soft body, their inti-
mate relationship—how could he be wrong? Only when Pei Pu, impris-
oned in the same jail, showed him the incontrovertible proof of his sex did
Bouriscout finally accept it.
Interpretation. The moment Pei Pu met Bouriscout, he realized he had
found the perfect victim. Bouriscout was lonely, bored, desperate. The way
he responded to Pei Pu suggested that he was probably also homosexual, or
perhaps bisexual—at least confused. (Bouriscout in fact had had homo-
sexual encounters as a boy; guilty about them, he had tried to repress this
side of himself.) Pei Pu had played women's parts before, and was quite
good at it; he was slight and effeminate; physically it was not a stretch. But
who would believe such a story, or at least not be skeptical of it?
The critical component of Pei Pu's seduction, in which he brought the
Frenchman's fantasy of adventure to life, was to start slowly and set up an
idea in his victim s mind. In his perfect French (which, however, was full of
interesting Chinese expressions), he got Bouriscout used to hearing stories
and tales, some true, some not, but all delivered in that dramatic yet believ-
able tone. Then he planted the idea of gender impersonation with his
"Story of the Butterfly." By the time he confessed the "truth" of his gen-
der, Bouriscout was already completely enchanted with him.
Bouriscout warded off all suspicious thoughts because he wanted to be-
lieve Pei Pu's story. From there it was easy Pei Pu faked his periods; it didn't
take much money to get hold of a child he could reasonably pass off as
their son. More important, he played the fantasy role to the hilt, remaining
elusive and mysterious (which was what a Westerner would expect from anseducer. . . . After an
interval Pauline pulled a
hell rope and ordered the
woman who answered to
prepare a hath which she
asked me to share.
Wearing bathgowns of the
finest linen we remained
for nearly an hour in the
crystal-clear bluish water.
Then we had a grand
dinner served in another
room and lingered on
together until dusk. When
I left I had to promise to
return again soon and I
spent many afternoons
with the princess in the
same way."
—HARRISON BRENT,
PAULINE BONAPARTE: A
WOMAN OF AFFAIRS
The courtesan is meant to
be a half-defined, floating
figure never fixing herself
surely in the imagination.
She is the memory of an
experience, the point at
which a dream is
transformed into reality or
reality into a dream. The
bright colors fade, her name
becomes a mere echo—echo
of an echo, since she has
probably adopted it from
some ancient predecessor.
The idea of the courtesan
is a garden of delights in
which the lover walks,
smelling first this flower
and then that but never
understanding whence
comes the fragrance that
intoxicates him. Why
should the courtesan not
elude analysis? She does
not want to be recognized
for what she is, but rather
to be allowed to be potent
and effective. She offers the
truth of herself—or, rather,
of the passions that become
directed toward her. And
what she gives back is one's
self and an hour of grace in
her presence. Love revives
