The Siren • 11
had deprived her of something critical: affection. Her deepest need was to
feel loved and desired, which made her seem constantly vulnerable, like a
little girl craving protection. She emanated this need for love before the
camera; it was effortless, coming from somewhere real and deep inside. A
look or gesture that she did not intend to arouse desire would do so doubly
powerfully just because it was unintended—its innocence was precisely
what excited a man.
The Sex Siren has a more urgent and immediate effect than the Spec-
tacular Siren does. The incarnation of sex and desire, she does not bother
to appeal to extraneous senses, or to create a theatrical buildup. Her time
never seems to be taken up by work or chores; she gives the impression that
she lives for pleasure and is always available. What separates the Sex Siren
from the courtesan or whore is her touch of innocence and vulnerability.
The mix is perversely satisfying: it gives the male the critical illusion that he
is a protector, the father figure, although it is actually the Sex Siren who
controls the dynamic.
A woman doesn't have to be born with the attributes of a Marilyn
Monroe to fill the role of the Sex Siren. Most of the physical elements are
a construction; the key is the air of schoolgirl innocence. While one part of
you seems to scream sex, the other part is coy and naive, as if you were in-
capable of understanding the effect you are having. Your walk, your voice,
your manner are delightfully ambiguous—you are both the experienced,
desiring woman and the innocent gamine.
Your next encounter will be with the Sirens, who bewitch
every man that approaches them. . . . For with the music
of their song the Sirens cast their spell upon him, as they
sit there in a meadow piled high with the moldering skele-
tons of men, whose withered skin still hangs upon their
bones.
—CIRCE TO ODYSSEUS, THE ODYSSEY, BOOK XII
Keys to the Character
The Siren is the most ancient seductress of them all. Her prototype is
the goddess Aphrodite—it is her nature to have a mythic quality about
her—but do not imagine she is a thing of the past, or of legend and his-
tory: she represents a powerful male fantasy of a highly sexual, supremely
confident, alluring female offering endless pleasure and a bit of danger. In
today's world this fantasy can only appeal the more strongly to the male
psyche, for now more than ever he lives in a world that circumscribes his
aggressive instincts by making everything safe and secure, a world that offers
less chance for adventure and risk than ever before. In the past, a man had
some outlets for these drives—warfare, the high seas, political intrigue. In
the sexual realm, courtesans and mistresses were practically a social institu-herdsman, not a soldier,"
said Paris. . . . "But I
promise to consider fairly
your claim to the apple.
Now you are at liberty to
put on your clothes and
helmet again. Is Aphrodite
ready?" • Aphrodite sidled
up to him, and Paris
blushed because she came
so close that they were
almost touching. • "Look
carefully, please, pass
nothing over. . . . By the
way, as soon as I saw you,
I said to myself: 'Upon my
word, there goes the
handsomest young man in
Phrygia! Why does he
waste himself here in the
wilderness herding stupid
cattle?' Well, why do you,
Paris? Why not move into
a city and lead a civilized
life? What have you to lose
by marrying someone like
Helen of Sparta, who is as
beautiful as I am, and no
less passionate? . . . I
suggest now that you tour
Greece with my son Eros
as your guide. Once you
reach Sparta, he and I will
see that Helen falls head
over heels in love with
you." • "Would you swear
to that?" Paris ashed
excitedly. • Aphrodite
uttered a solemn oath, and
Paris, without a second
thought, awarded her the
golden apple.
—ROBERT GRAVES, THE GREEK
MYTHS, VOLUME I
12 • The Art of Seduction
tion, and offered him the variety and the chase that he craved. Without any
outlets, his drives turn inward and gnaw at him, becoming all the more
volatile for being repressed. Sometimes a powerful man will do the most ir-
rational things, have an affair when it is least called for, just for a thrill, the
danger of it all. The irrational can prove immensely seductive, even more
so for men, who must always seem so reasonable.
If it is seductive power you are after, the Siren is the most potent of all.
She operates on a man's most basic emotions, and if she plays her role prop-
erly, she can transform a normally strong and responsible male into a child-
ish slave. The Siren operates well on the rigid masculine type—the soldier
or hero—just as Cleopatra overwhelmed Mark Antony and Marilyn Mon-
roe Joe DiMaggio. But never imagine that these are the only types the
Siren can affect. Julius Caesar was a writer and thinker, who had transferred
his intellectual abilities onto the battlefield and into the political arena; the
playwright Arthur Miller fell as deeply under Monroe's spell as DiMaggio.
The intellectual is often the one most susceptible to the Siren call of pure
physical pleasure, because his life so lacks it. The Siren does not have to
worry about finding the right victim. Her magic works on one and all.
First and foremost, a Siren must distinguish herself from other women.
She is by nature a rare thing, mythic, only one to a group; she is also a valu-
able prize to be wrested away from other men. Cleopatra made herself dif-
ferent through her sense of high drama; the Empress Josephine Bonaparte's
device was her extreme languorousness; Marilyn Monroe's was her little-
girl quality. Physicality offers the best opportunities here, since a Siren is
preeminently a sight to behold. A highly feminine and sexual presence,
even to the point of caricature, will quickly differentiate you, since most
women lack the confidence to project such an image.
Once the Siren has made herself stand out from others, she must have
two other critical qualities: the ability to get the male to pursue her so
feverishly that he loses control; and a touch of the dangerous. Danger is
surprisingly seductive. To get the male to pursue you is relatively simple: a
highly sexual presence will do this quite well. But you must not resemble a
courtesan or whore, whom the male may pursue only to quickly lose inter-
est in her. Instead, you are slightly elusive and distant, a fantasy come to life.
During the Renaissance, the great Sirens, such as Tullia d'Aragona, would
act and look like Grecian goddesses—the fantasy of the day. Today you
might model yourself on a film goddess—anything that seems larger than
life, even awe inspiring. These qualities will make a man chase you vehe-
mently, and the more he chases, the more he will feel that he is acting on
his own initiative. This is an excellent way of disguising how deeply you
are manipulating him.
The notion of danger, challenge, sometimes death, might seem out-
dated, but danger is critical in seduction. It adds emotional spice and is
particularly appealing to men today, who are normally so rational and re-
pressed. Danger is present in the original myth of the Siren. In Homer's
Odyssey, the hero Odysseus must sail by the rocks where the Sirens, strangeTo whom aw I compare
the lovely girl, so blessed by
fortune, if not to the
Sirens, who with their
lodestone draw the ships
towards them? Thus, I
imagine, did Isolde attract
many thoughts and hearts
that deemed themselves
safe from love's
disquietude. And indeed
these two—anchorless
ships and stray thoughts—
provide a good comparison.
They are both so seldom
on a straight course, lie so
often in unsure havens,
pitching and tossing and
heaving to and fro. Just so,
in the same way, do
aimless desire and random
love-longing drift like an
anchorless ship. This
charming young princess,
discreet and courteous
Isolde, drew thoughts from
the hearts that enshrined
them as a lodestone draws
in ships to the sound of the
Sirens' song. She sang
openly and secretly, in
through ears and eyes to
where many a heart was
stirred. The song which she
sang openly in this and
other places was her own
sweet singing and soft
sounding of strings that
echoed for all to hear
through the kingdom of the
ears deep down into the
heart. But her secret song
was her wondrous beauty
that stole with its rapturous
music hidden and unseen
through the windows of the
eyes into many noble
hearts and smoothed on the
magic which took thoughts
prisoner suddenly, and,
taking them, fettered them
with desire!
—GOTTFRIED VON STRASSBURG,
TRISTAN, TRANSLATED BY
A.T. HATTO
