372 • The Art of Seduction
with him that she would dress in front of him, or greet him in her night-
gown. These glimpses of her body drove him crazy, and he would some-
times try to steal a kiss or caress, only to have her push him away and scold
him. Weeks went by; clearly he had shown that his was not a passing fancy.
Tired of the endless courtship, he took Conchita's mother aside one day
and proposed that he set the girl up in a house of her own. He would treat
her like a queen; she would have everything she wanted. (So, of course,
would her mother.) Surely his proposal would satisfy the two women—but
the next day, a note came from Conchita, expressing not gratitude but re-
crimination: he was trying to buy her love. "You shall never see me again,"
she concluded. He hurried to the house only to discover that the women
had moved out that very morning, without leaving word where they were
going.
Don Mateo felt terrible. Yes, he had acted like a boor. Next time he
would wait months, or years if need be, before being so bold. Soon, how-
ever, another thought assailed him: he would never see Conchita again.
Only then did he realize how much he loved her.
The winter passed, the worst of Mateo's life. One spring day he was
walking down the street when he heard someone calling his name. He
looked up: Conchita was standing in an open window, beaming with ex-
citement. She bent down toward him and he kissed her hand, beside him-
self with joy. Why had she disappeared so suddenly? It was all going too
quickly, she said. She had been afraid—of his intentions, and of her own
feelings. But seeing him again, she was certain that she loved him. Yes, she
was ready to be his mistress. She would prove it, she would come to him.
Being apart had changed them both, he thought.
A few nights later, as promised, she appeared at his house. They kissed
and began to undress. He wanted to savor every minute, to take it slowly,
but he felt like a caged bull finally set free. He followed her into bed, his
hands all over her. He started to take off her underwear but it was laced up
in some complicated way. Eventually he had to sit up and take a look: she
was wearing some elaborate canvas contraption, of a kind he had never
seen. No matter how hard he tugged and pulled, it would not come off.
He felt like hitting Conchita, he was so distraught, but instead he started to
cry. She explained: she wanted to do everything with him, yet to remain a
mozita. This was her protection. Exasperated, he sent her home.
Over the next few weeks, Don Mateo began to reassess his opinion of
Conchita. He saw her flirting with other men, and dancing a suggestive fla-
menco in a bar: she was not a mozita, he decided, she was playing him for
money. And yet he could not leave her. Another man would take his
place—an unbearable thought. She would invite him to spend the night in
her bed, as long as he promised not to force himself on her; and then, as if
to torture him beyond reason, she would get into bed naked (supposedly
because of the heat). All this he put up with on the grounds that no other
man had such privileges. But one night, pushed to the limits of frustration,
he exploded with anger, and issued an ultimatum: either give me what Iconscious \ Of rivals, of
shared delights. Neglect \
These devices—his ardor
will wane. A racehorse runs
most strongly \ When the
field's ahead, to be paced \
And passed. So the dying
embers of passion can be
fanned to \ Fresh flame by
some outrage—I can only
love, \ Myself, I confess it,
when wronged. But don't
let the cause of \ Pain be
too obvious: let a lover
suspect \ More than he
knows. Invent a slave who
watches your every \
Movement, make clear
what a jealous martinet \
That man of yours is—
such things will excite him.
Pleasure \ Too safely
enjoyed lacks zest. You
want to be free \ As Thaïs?
Act scared. Though the
door's quite safe, let him in
by \ The window. Look
nervous. Have a smart \
Maid rush in, scream
"We're caught!" while you
bundle the quaking \ Youth
out of sight. But be sure \
To offset his fright with
some moments of carefree
pleasure— \ Or he'll think
a night with you isn't
worth the risk.
—OVID. THE ART OF LOVE,
TRANSLATED BY PETER GREEN
"Certainly," I said, "I
have often told you that
pain holds a peculiar
attraction for me, and that
nothing kindles my passion
quite so much as tyranny
cruelty and above all
unfaithfulness in a
beautiful woman."
—LEOPOLD VON SACHER-
MASOCH, VENUS IN FURS,
TRANSLATED BY JEAN MCNEIL
Mix Pleasure with Pain • 373
want or you will never see me again. Suddenly Conchita started to cry. He
had never seen her cry, and it moved him. She too was tired of all this, she
said, her voice trembling; if it was not too late, she was ready to accept the
proposal she had once turned down. Set her up in a house, and he would
see what a devoted mistress she would be.
Don Mateo wasted no time. He bought her a villa, gave her plenty of
money to decorate it. After eight days the house was ready. She would re-
ceive him there at midnight. What joys awaited him.
Don Mateo showed up at the appointed hour. The barred door to the
courtyard was closed. He rang the bell. She came to the other side of the
door. "Kiss my hands," she said through the bars. "Now kiss the hem of my
skirt, and the tip of my foot in its slipper." He did as she requested. "That is
good," she said. "Now you may go." His shocked expression just made her
laugh. She ridiculed him, then made a confession: she was repulsed by him.
Now that she had a villa in her name, she was free of him at last. She called
out, and a young man appeared from the shadows of the courtyard. As Don
Mateo watched, too stunned to move, they began to make love on the
floor, right before his eyes.
The next morning Conchita appeared at Don Mateo's house, suppos-
edly to see if he had committed suicide. To her surprise, he hadn't—in fact
he slapped her so hard she fell to the ground. "Conchita," he said, "you
have made me suffer beyond all human strength. You have invented moral
tortures to try them on the only man who loved you passionately. I now
declare that I am going to possess you by force." Conchita screamed she
would never be his, but he hit her again and again. Finally, moved by her
tears, he stopped. Now she looked up at him lovingly. Forget the past, she
said, forget all that I have done. Now that he hit her, now that she could see
his pain, she felt certain he truly loved her. She was still a mozita—the affair
with the young man the night before had been only for show, ending as
soon as he had left—and she still belonged to him. "You are not going to
take me by force. I await you in my arms." Finally she was sincere. To his
supreme delight, he discovered that she was indeed still a virgin.
Interpretation. Don Mateo and Conchita Perez are characters in the 1896
novella Woman and Puppet, by Pierre Louÿs. Based on a true story—the
"Miss Charpillon" episode in Casanova's Memoirs—the novella has served as
the basis for two films: Josef von Sternberg's Devil Is a Woman, with Mar-
lene Dietrich, and Luis Buñuel's That Obscure Object of Desire. In Louÿs's
story, Conchita takes a proud and aggressive older man and in the space of a
few months turns him into an abject slave. Her method is simple: she stimu-
lates as many emotions as possible, including heavy doses of pain. She ex-
cites his lust, then makes him feel base for taking advantage of her. She gets
him to play the protector, then makes him feel guilty for trying to buy her.
Her sudden disappearance anguishes him—he has lost her—so that when
she reappears (never by accident) he feels intense joy; which, however, sheOderint, dum metuant
[Let them hate me so long
as they fear me], as if only
fear and hate belong
together, whereas fear and
love have nothing to do
with each other, as if it
were not fear that makes
love interesting. With what
kind of love do we embrace
nature? Is there not a
secretive anxiety and horror
in it, because its beautiful
harmony works its way out
of lawlessness and wild
confusion, its security out
of perfidy? But precisely
this anxiety captivates the
most. So also with love, if
it is to he interesting.
Behind it ought to brood
the deep, anxious night
from which springs the
flower of love.
—SØREN KIERKEGAARD,
THE SEDUCER'S DIARY,
TRANSLATED BY HOWARD V.
HONG AND EDNA H. HONG
The lovely marble creature
coughed and rearranged the
sable around her shoulders.
• "Thank you for the
lesson in classics," I replied,
"but I cannot deny that in
your peaceful and sunny
world just as in our misty
climate man and woman
are natural enemies. Love
may unite them briefly to
form one mind, one heart,
one will, but all too soon
they are torn asunder. And
this you know better than
I: either one of them must
bend the other to his will,
or else he must let himself
be trampled underfoot. " •
"Under the woman's foot,
of course," said Lady
Venus impertinently. "And
that you know better than
I." • "Of course, that is
why I have no illusions." •
"In other words you are
now my slave without
illusions, and I shall
