144 • The Art of Seduction
from the table and put them back in place. The speech that followed was all
the more masterful for its calm and ironic contrast to Gladstone's. The
members of Parliament were spellbound, and all of them agreed he had
won the day.
If Disraeli was the consummate social seducer and charmer, Gladstone was
the Anti-Seducer. Of course he had supporters, mostly among the more
puritanical elements of society—he twice defeated Disraeli in a general
election. But he found it hard to broaden his appeal beyond the circle of
believers. Women in particular found him insufferable. Of course they had
no vote at the time, so they were little political liability; but Gladstone had
no patience for a feminine point of view. A woman, he felt, had to learn to
see things as a man did, and it was his purpose in life to educate those he
felt were irrational or abandoned by God.
It did not take long for Gladstone to wear on anyone's nerves. That is
the nature of people who are convinced of some truth, but have no pa-
tience for a different perspective or for dealing with someone else's psy-
chology. These types are bullies, and in the short term they often get their
way, particularly among the less aggressive. But they stir up a lot of resent-
ment and unspoken antipathy, which eventually trips them up. People see
through their righteous moral stance, which is most often a cover for a
power play—morality is a form of power. A seducer never seeks to per-
suade directly, never parades his or her morality, never lectures or imposes.
Everything is subtle, psychological, and indirect.
Symbol: The
Crab. In a harsh world, the crab sur-
vives by its hardened shell, by the threat of its
pincers, and by burrowing into the sand. No one dares
get too close. But the Crab cannot surprise its enemy and has
little mobility. Its defensive strength is its supreme limitation.
The Anti-Seducer • 145
Uses of Anti-Seduction
The best way to avoid entanglements with Anti-Seducers is to recognize
them right away and give them a wide berth, but they often deceive
us. Involvements with these types are painful, and are hard to disengage
from, because the more emotional response you show, the more engaged
you seem to be. Do not get angry—that may only encourage them or
exacerbate their anti-seductive tendencies. Instead, act distant and indiffer-
ent, pay no attention to them, make them feel how little they matter to
you. The best antidote to an Anti-Seducer is often to be anti-seductive
yourself.
Cleopatra had a devastating effect on every man who crossed her path.
Octavius—the future Emperor Augustus, and the man who would de-
feat and destroy Cleopatra's lover Mark Antony—was well aware of her
power, and defended himself against it by being always extremely amiable
with her, courteous to the extreme, but never showing the slightest emo-
tion, whether of interest or dislike. In other words, he treated her as if she
were any other woman. Facing this front, she could not sink her hooks into
him. Octavius made anti-seduction his defense against the most irresistible
woman in history. Remember: seduction is a game of attention, of slowly
filling the other person's mind with your presence. Distance and inattention
will create the opposite effect, and can be used as a tactic when the need
arises.
Finally, if you really want to "anti-seduce," simply feign the qualities
listed at the beginning of the chapter. Nag; talk a lot, particularly about
yourself; dress against the other person's tastes; pay no attention to detail;
suffocate, and so on. A word of warning: with the arguing type, the Wind-
bag, never talk back too much. Words will only fan the flames. Adopt the
Queen Victoria strategy: nod, seem to agree, then find an excuse to cut the
conversation short. This is the only defense.
