34 • The Art of Seduction
On top of it all, Jeanne was beautiful, and had a charm and grace that set
her apart early on. In 1741, she married a man of the lower nobility. Now
known as Madame d'Etioles, she could realize a great ambition: she opened
a literary salon. All of the great writers and philosophers of the time fre-
quented the salon, many because they were enamored of the hostess. One
of these was Voltaire, who became a lifelong friend.
Through all Jeanne's success, she never forgot the fortune-teller's pre-
diction, and still believed that she would one day conquer the king's heart.
It happened that one of her husband's country estates bordered on King
Louis's favorite hunting grounds. She would spy on him through the fence,
or find ways to cross his path, always while she happened to be wearing an
elegant, yet fetching outfit. Soon the king was sending her gifts of game.
When his official mistress died, in 1744, all of the court beauties vied to
take her place; but he began to spend more and more time with Madame
d'Etioles, dazzled by her beauty and charm. To the astonishment of the
court, that same year he made this middle-class woman his official mistress,
ennobling her with the title of the Marquise de Pompadour.
The king's need for novelty was notorious: a mistress would beguile
him with her looks, but he would soon grow bored with her and find
someone else. After the shock of his choice of Jeanne Poisson wore off, the
courtiers reassured themselves that it could not last—that he had only cho-
sen her for the novelty of having a middle-class mistress. Little did they
know that Jeanne s first seduction of the king was not the last seduction she
had in mind.
As time went by, the king found himself visiting his mistress more and
more often. As he ascended the hidden stair that led from his quarters to
hers in the palace of Versailles, anticipation of the delights that awaited him
at the top would begin to turn his head. First, the room was always warm,
and was filled with delightful scents. Then there were the visual delights:
Madame de Pompadour always wore a different costume, each one elegant
and surprising in its own way. She loved beautiful objects—fine porcelain,
Chinese fans, golden flowerpots—and every time he visited, there would
be something new and enchanting to see. Her manner was always light-
hearted; she was never defensive or resentful. Everything for pleasure. Then
there was their conversation: he had never been really able to talk with a
woman before, or to laugh, but the marquise could discourse skillfully on
any subject, and her voice was a pleasure to hear. And if the conversation
waned, she would move to the piano, play a tune, and sing wonderfully.
If ever the king seemed bored or sad, Madame de Pompadour would
propose some project—perhaps the building of a new country house. He
would have to advise in the design, the layout of the gardens, the decor.
Back at Versailles, Madame de Pompadour put hersell in charge of the
palace amusements, building a private theater for weekly performances un-
der her direction. Actors were chosen from among the courtiers, but the
female lead was always played by Madame de Pompadour, who was one of
the finest amateur actresses in France. The king became obsessed with thissure indication that the
sitter intended to secure a
posthumous fame as well.
Warhol's portraits were not
so much realistic documents
of contemporary faces as
they were designer icons
awaiting future devotions.
—DAVID BOURDON, WARHOL
Women have served all
these centuries as looking
glasses possessing the magic
and delicious power of
reflecting the figure of a
man at twice its natural
size.
—VIRGINIA WOOLF, A ROOM
OF ONE'S OWN
The Ideal Lover • 35
theater; he could barely wait for its performances. Along with this interest
came an increasing expenditure of money on the arts, and an involvement
in philosophy and literature. A man who had cared only for hunting and
gambling was spending less and less time with his male companions and be-
coming a great patron of the arts. Indeed he stamped a whole era with an
aesthetic style, which became known as "Louis Quinze," rivaling the style
associated with his illustrious predecessor, Louis XIV.
Lo and behold, year after year went by without Louis tiring of his mis-
tress. In fact he made her a duchess, and her power and influence extended
well beyond culture into politics. For twenty years, Madame de Pompadour
ruled both the court and the king's heart, until her untimely death, in
1764, at the age of forty-three.
Louis XV had a powerful inferiority complex. The successor to Louis XIV,
the most powerful king in French history, he had been educated and
trained for the throne—yet who could follow his predecessor's act? Eventu-
ally he gave up trying, devoting himself instead to physical pleasures, which
came to define how he was seen; the people around him knew they could
sway him by appealing to the basest parts of his character.
Madame de Pompadour, genius of seduction, understood that inside
Louis XV was a great man yearning to come out, and that his obsession
with pretty young women indicated a hunger for a more lasting kind of
beauty. Her first step was to cure his incessant bouts of boredom. It is easy
for kings to be bored—everything they want is given to them, and they sel-
dom learn to be satisfied with what they have. The Marquise de Pom-
padour dealt with this by bringing all sorts of fantasies to life, and creating
constant suspense. She had many skills and talents, and just as important,
she deployed them so artfully that he never discovered their limits. Once
she had accustomed him to more refined pleasures, she appealed to the
crushed ideals within him; in the mirror she held up to him, he saw his as-
piration to be great, a desire that, in France, inevitably included leadership
in culture. His previous series of mistresses had tickled only his sensual de-
sires. In Madame de Pompadour he found a woman who made him feel
greatness in himself. The other mistresses could easily be replaced, but he
could never find another Madame de Pompadour.
Most people believe themselves to be inwardly greater than they out-
wardly appear to the world. They are full of unrealized ideals: they could
be artists, thinkers, leaders, spiritual figures, but the world has crushed
them, denied them the chance to let their abilities flourish. This is the key
to their seduction—and to keeping them seduced over time. The Ideal
Lover knows how to conjure up this kind of magic. Appeal only to people's
physical side, as many amateur seducers do, and they will resent you for
playing upon their basest instincts. But appeal to their better selves, to a
higher standard of beauty, and they will hardly notice that they have been
seduced. Make them feel elevated, lofty, spiritual, and your power over
them will be limitless.
