10 • The Art of Seduction
A few years later Marilyn was trying to make it in the film business.
Producers would tell her the same thing: she was attractive enough in per-
son, but her face wasn't pretty enough for the movies. She was getting
work as an extra, and when she was on-screen—even if only for a few sec-
onds—the men in the audience would go wild, and the theaters would
erupt in catcalls. But nobody saw any star quality in this. One day in 1949,
only twenty-three at the time and her career at a standstill, Monroe met
someone at a diner who told her that a producer casting a new Groucho
Marx movie, Love Happy, was looking for an actress for the part of a blond
bombshell who could walk by Groucho in a way that would, in his words,
"arouse my elderly libido and cause smoke to issue from my ears." Talking
her way into an audition, she improvised this walk. "It's Mae West, Theda
Bara, and Bo Peep all rolled into one," said Groucho after watching her
saunter by. "We shoot the scene tomorrow morning." And so Marilyn cre-
ated her infamous walk, a walk that was hardly natural but offered a strange
mix of innocence and sex.
Over the next few years, Marilyn taught herself through trial and er-
ror how to heighten the effect she had on men. Her voice had always been
attractive—it was the voice of a little girl. But on film it had limitations un-
til someone finally taught her to lower it, giving it the deep, breathy tones
that became her seductive trademark, a mix of the little girl and the vixen.
Before appearing on set, or even at a party, Marilyn would spend hours be-
fore the mirror. Most people assumed this was vanity—she was in love with
her image. The truth was that image took hours to create. Marilyn spent
years studying and practicing the art of makeup. The voice, the walk, the
face and look were all constructions, an act. At the height of her fame, she
would get a thrill by going into bars in New York City without her makeup
or glamorous clothes and passing unnoticed.
Success finally came, but with it came something deeply annoying to
her: the studios would only cast her as the blond bombshell. She wanted se-
rious roles, but no one took her seriously for those parts, no matter how
hard she downplayed the siren qualities she had built up. One day, while she
was rehearsing a scene from The Cherry Orchard, her acting instructor, Mi-
chael Chekhov, asked her, "Were you thinking of sex while we played the
scene?" When she said no, he continued, "All through our playing of the
scene I kept receiving sex vibrations from you. As if you were a woman in
the grip of passion. ... I understand your problem with your studio now,
Marilyn. You are a woman who gives off sex vibrations—no matter what
you are doing or thinking. The whole world has already responded to those
vibrations. They come off the movie screens when you are on them."
Marilyn Monroe loved the effect her body could have on the male libido.
She tuned her physical presence like an instrument, making herself reek of
sex and gaining a glamorous, larger-than-life appearance. Other women
knew just as many tricks for heightening their sexual appeal, but what sepa-
rated Marilyn from them was an unconscious element. Her backgroundmistakes." • The
goddesses all agreed to
abide by his decision. •
"Will it be enough to
judge them as they are?"
Paris asked Hermes, "or
should they he naked?" •
"The rules of the contest
are for you to decide,"
Hermes answered with a
discreet smile. • "In that
case, will they kindly
disrobe?" • Hermes told
the goddesses to do so, and
politely turned his back. •
Aphrodite was soon ready,
but Athene insisted that
she should remove the
famous magic girdle, which
gave her an unfair
advantage by making
everyone fall in love
withthe wearer. "Very
well" said Aphrodite
spitefully. "I will, on
condition that you remove
your helmet—you look
hideous without it. " •
"Now, if you please, 1
must judge you one at
a time" announced
Paris. . . . Come here,
Divine Hera! Will you
other two goddesses be good
enough to leave us for a
while?" • "Examine me
conscientiously," said Hera,
turning slowly around, and
displaying her magnificent
figure, "and remember that
if you judge me the fairest,
1 will make you lord of all
Asia, and the richest man
alive. " • "I am not to be
bribed my Lady . . . Very
well, thank you. Now I
have seen all that I need to
see. Come, Divine
Athene!" • "Here I am,"
said Athene, striding
purposefully forward.
"Listen, Paris, if you have
enough common sense to
award me the prize, I will
make you victorious in
all your battles, as well
as the handsomest and
wisest man in the world."
• "I am a humble
The Siren • 11
had deprived her of something critical: affection. Her deepest need was to
feel loved and desired, which made her seem constantly vulnerable, like a
little girl craving protection. She emanated this need for love before the
camera; it was effortless, coming from somewhere real and deep inside. A
look or gesture that she did not intend to arouse desire would do so doubly
powerfully just because it was unintended—its innocence was precisely
what excited a man.
The Sex Siren has a more urgent and immediate effect than the Spec-
tacular Siren does. The incarnation of sex and desire, she does not bother
to appeal to extraneous senses, or to create a theatrical buildup. Her time
never seems to be taken up by work or chores; she gives the impression that
she lives for pleasure and is always available. What separates the Sex Siren
from the courtesan or whore is her touch of innocence and vulnerability.
The mix is perversely satisfying: it gives the male the critical illusion that he
is a protector, the father figure, although it is actually the Sex Siren who
controls the dynamic.
A woman doesn't have to be born with the attributes of a Marilyn
Monroe to fill the role of the Sex Siren. Most of the physical elements are
a construction; the key is the air of schoolgirl innocence. While one part of
you seems to scream sex, the other part is coy and naive, as if you were in-
capable of understanding the effect you are having. Your walk, your voice,
your manner are delightfully ambiguous—you are both the experienced,
desiring woman and the innocent gamine.
Your next encounter will be with the Sirens, who bewitch
every man that approaches them. . . . For with the music
of their song the Sirens cast their spell upon him, as they
sit there in a meadow piled high with the moldering skele-
tons of men, whose withered skin still hangs upon their
bones.
—CIRCE TO ODYSSEUS, THE ODYSSEY, BOOK XII
Keys to the Character
The Siren is the most ancient seductress of them all. Her prototype is
the goddess Aphrodite—it is her nature to have a mythic quality about
her—but do not imagine she is a thing of the past, or of legend and his-
tory: she represents a powerful male fantasy of a highly sexual, supremely
confident, alluring female offering endless pleasure and a bit of danger. In
today's world this fantasy can only appeal the more strongly to the male
psyche, for now more than ever he lives in a world that circumscribes his
aggressive instincts by making everything safe and secure, a world that offers
less chance for adventure and risk than ever before. In the past, a man had
some outlets for these drives—warfare, the high seas, political intrigue. In
the sexual realm, courtesans and mistresses were practically a social institu-herdsman, not a soldier,"
said Paris. . . . "But I
promise to consider fairly
your claim to the apple.
Now you are at liberty to
put on your clothes and
helmet again. Is Aphrodite
ready?" • Aphrodite sidled
up to him, and Paris
blushed because she came
so close that they were
almost touching. • "Look
carefully, please, pass
nothing over. . . . By the
way, as soon as I saw you,
I said to myself: 'Upon my
word, there goes the
handsomest young man in
Phrygia! Why does he
waste himself here in the
wilderness herding stupid
cattle?' Well, why do you,
Paris? Why not move into
a city and lead a civilized
life? What have you to lose
by marrying someone like
Helen of Sparta, who is as
beautiful as I am, and no
less passionate? . . . I
suggest now that you tour
Greece with my son Eros
as your guide. Once you
reach Sparta, he and I will
see that Helen falls head
over heels in love with
you." • "Would you swear
to that?" Paris ashed
excitedly. • Aphrodite
uttered a solemn oath, and
Paris, without a second
thought, awarded her the
golden apple.
—ROBERT GRAVES, THE GREEK
MYTHS, VOLUME I
