Create a Need—Stir Anxiety and Discontent • 209
change, difference, a breakup of routines. Make your victims feel that by
comparison their lives are boring and their friends less interesting than they
had thought. Lawrence made his targets feel personally inadequate; if you
find it hard to be so brutal, concentrate on their friends, their circum-
stances, the externals of their lives. There are many legends of Don Juan,
but they often describe him seducing a village girl by making her feel that
her life is horribly provincial. He, meanwhile, wears glittering clothes and
has a noble bearing. Strange and exotic, he is always from somewhere else.
First she feels the boredom of her life, then she sees him as her salvation.
Remember: people prefer to feel that if their life is uninteresting, it not be-
cause of themselves but because of their circumstances, the dull people
they know, the town into which they were born. Once you make them feel
the lure of the exotic, seduction is easy.
Another devilishly seductive area to aim at is the victim's past. To grow
old is to renounce or compromise youthful ideals, to become less sponta-
neous, less alive in a way. This knowledge lies dormant in all of us. As a se-
ducer you must bring it to the surface, make it clear how far people have
strayed from their past goals and ideals. You, in turn, present yourself as
representing that ideal, as offering a chance to recapture lost youth through
adventure—through seduction. In her later years, Queen Elizabeth I of En-
gland was known as a rather stern and demanding ruler. She made it a point
not to let her courtiers see anything soft or weak in her. But then Robert
Devereux, the second Earl of Essex, came to court. Much younger than
the queen, the dashing Essex would often chastize her for her sourness.
The queen would forgive him—he was so exuberant and spontaneous, he
could not control himself. But his comments got under her skin; in the pres-
ence of Essex she came to remember all the youthful ideals—spiritedness,
feminine charm—that had since vanished from her life. She also felt a little
of that girlish spirit return when she was around him. He quickly became
her favorite, and soon she was in love with him. Old age is constantly se-
duced by youth, but first the young people must make it clear what the
older ones are missing, how they have lost their ideals. Only then will they
feel that the presence of the young will let them recapture that spark, the
rebellious spirit that age and society have conspired to repress.
This concept has infinite applications. Corporations and politicians
know that they cannot seduce their public into buying what they want
them to buy, or doing what they want them to do, unless they first awaken
a sense of need and discontent. Make the masses uncertain about their
identity and you can help define it for them. It is as true of groups or na-
tions as it is of individuals: they cannot be seduced without being made to
feel some lack. Part of John F. Kennedy's election strategy in 1960 was to
make Americans unhappy about the 1950s, and how far the country had
strayed from its ideals. In talking about the 1950s, he did not mention the
nation's economic stability or its emergence as a superpower. Instead, he
implied that the period was marked by conformity, a lack of risk and ad-
venture, a loss of our frontier values. To vote for Kennedy was to embarkAmerican frontier. • But I
trust that no one in this
vast assemblage will agree
with those sentiments. . . .
• . . . I tell you the New
Frontier is here, whether
we seek it or not. . . . It
would be easier to shrink
back from that frontier, to
look to the safe mediocrity
of the past, to be lulled by
good intentions and high
rhetoric—and those who
prefer that course should
not cast their votes for me,
regardless of party. • But I
believe that the times
demand invention,
innovation, imagination,
decision. I am asking each
of you to be new pioneers
on that New Frontier. My
call is to the young in
heart, regardless of age.
—JOHN F. KENNEDY,
ACCEPTANCE SPEECH AS THE
PRESIDENTIAL NOMINEE OF THE
DEMOCRATIC PARTY, QUOTED IN
JOHN HELLMANN, THE
KENNEDY OBSESSION: THE
AMERICAN MYTH OF JFK
The normal rhythm of life
oscillates in general between
a mild satisfaction with
oneself and a slight
discomfort, originating in
the knowledge of one's
personal shortcomings. We
should like to be as
handsome, young, strong or
clever as other people of our
acquaintance. We wish we
could achieve as much as
they do, long for similar
advantages, positions, the
same or greater success. To
be delighted with oneself is
the exception and, often
enough, a smoke screen
which we produce for
ourselves and of course for
others. Somewhere in it is
a lingering feeling of
discomfort with ourselves
and a slight self-dislike. I
assert that an increase of
210 • The Art of Seduction
on a collective adventure, to go back to ideals we had given up. But before
anyone joined his crusade they had to be made aware of how much they
had lost, what was missing. A group, like an individual, can get mired in
routine, losing track of its original goals. Too much prosperity saps it of
strength. You can seduce an entire nation by aiming at its collective insecu-
rity, that latent sense that not everything is what it seems. Stirring dissatis-
faction with the present and reminding people about the glorious past can
unsettle their sense of identity. Then you can be the one to redefine it—a
grand seduction.
Symbol: Cupid's Arrow. What awakens desire in the seduced is
not a soft touch or a pleasant sensation; it is a wound. The ar-
row creates a pain, an ache, a need for relief Before desire
there must be pain. Aim the arrow at the victim's
weakest spot, creating a wound that you
can open and reopen.
Reversal
If you go too far in lowering the targets' self-esteem they may feel too in-
secure to enter into your seduction. Do not be heavy-handed; like
Lawrence, always follow up the wounding attack with a soothing gesture.
Otherwise you will simply alienate them.
Charm is often a subtler and more effective route to seduction. The
Victorian Prime Minister Benjamin Disraeli always made people feel better
about themselves. He deferred to them, made them the center of attention,
made them feel witty and vibrant. He was a boon to their vanity, and they
grew addicted to him. This is a kind of diffused seduction, lacking in ten-
sion and in the deep emotions that the sexual variety stirs; it bypasses peo-
ple's hunger, their need for some kind of fulfillment. But if you are subtle
and clever, it can be a way of lowering their defenses, creating an unthreat-
ening friendship. Once they are under your spell in this way, you can then
open the wound. Indeed, after Disraeli had charmed Queen Victoria and
established a friendship with her, he made her feel vaguely inadequate in
the establishment of an empire and the realization of her ideals. Everything
depends on the target. People who are riddled with insecurities may re-
quire the gentler variety. Once they feel comfortable with you, aim your
arrows.this spirit of discontent
renders a person especially
susceptible to "falling in
love." . . . In most cases
this attitude of disquiet is
unconscious, but in some it
reaches the threshold of
awareness in the form of a
slight uneasiness, or a
stagnant dissatisfaction, or
a realization of being upset
without knowing why.
—THEODOR REIK,
OF LOVE AND LUST
