232 • The Art of Seduction
her mistress. Then he strolled by Cristeta's house—a beautiful palace. His
worst suspicions were confirmed: she had married for money.
Cristeta refused to see him. He persisted, sending more notes. Finally,
to avoid a scene, she agreed to meet him, just once, in the park. He pre-
pared for the meeting carefully: seducing her again would be a delicate op-
eration. But when he saw her coming toward him, in her beautiful clothes,
his emotions, and his lust, got the better of him. She could only belong to
him, never to another man, he told her. Cristeta took offense at this; obvi-
ously her present circumstances prevented even one more meeting. Still,
beneath her coolness he could sense strong emotions. He begged to see her
again, but she left without promising anything. He sent her more letters,
meanwhile wracking his brains trying to piece it all together: Who was this
Señor Martínez? Why would he marry a showgirl? How could Cristeta be
wrested away from him?
Finally Cristeta agreed to meet Don Juan one more time, in the theater,
where he dared not risk a scandal. They took a box, where they could talk.
She reassured him the child was not his. She said he only wanted her now
because she belonged to another, because he could not have her. No, he
said, he had changed; he would do anything to get her back. Disconcert-
ingly, at moments her eyes seemed to be flirting with him. But then she
seemed to be about to cry, and rested her head on his shoulder—only to
get up immediately, as if realizing this was a mistake. This was their last
meeting, she said, and quickly fled. Don Juan was beside himself. She was
playing with him; she was a coquette. He had only been claiming to have
changed, but perhaps it was true: no woman had ever treated him this way
before. He would never have allowed it.
For the next few nights Don Juan slept poorly. All he could think about
was Cristeta. He had nightmares about killing her husband, about growing
old and being alone. It was all too much. He had to leave town. He sent
her a goodbye note, and to his amazement, she replied: she wanted to see
him, she had something to tell him. By now he was too weak to resist. As
she had requested, he met her on a bridge, at night. This time she made no
effort to control herself: yes, she still loved Don Juan, and was ready to run
away with him. But he should come to her house tomorrow, in broad day-
light, and take her away. There could be no secrecy.
Beside himself with joy, Don Juan agreed to her demands. The next day
he showed up at her palace at the appointed hour, and asked for Señora
Martinez. There was no one there by that name, said the woman at the
door. Don Juan insisted: her name is Cristeta. Ah, Cristeta, the woman said:
she lives in the back, with the other tenants. Confused, Don Juan went to
the back of the palace. There he thought he saw her son, playing in the
street in dirty clothes. But no, he said to himself, it must be some other
child. He came to Cristeta's door, and instead of her servant, Cristeta herself
opened it. He entered. It was the room of a poor person. Hanging on im-
provised racks, however, were Cristeta's elegant clothes. As if in a dream, he
sat down, dumbfounded, and listened as Cristeta revealed the truth.Don Juan: Arminta, listen
to the truth—-for are not
women friends of truth? I
am a nobleman, heir to the
ancient family of the
Tenorios, the conquerors of
Seville. After the king, my
father is the most powerful
and considered man at
court. . . . By chance I
happened on this road and
saw you. Love sometimes
behaves in a manner that
surprises even himself. . . .
• Arminta: I don't know if
what you're saying is truth
or lying rhetoric. I am
married to Batricio,
everybody knows it. How
can the marriage be
annulled, even if he
abandons me? • Don Juan:
When the marriage is not
consummated, whether by
malice or deceit, it can be
annulled. . . . • Arminta:
You are right. But, God
help me, won't you desert
me the moment you have
separated me from my
husband? . . . • Don
Juan: Arminta, light of my
eyes, tomorrow your
beautiful feet will slip into
polished silver slippers with
buttons of the purest gold.
And your alabaster throat
will be imprisoned in
beautiful necklaces; on
your fingers, rings set with
amethysts will shine like
stars, and from your ears
will da ngle orien tal pearls.
• Arminta: I am yours.
—TIRSO DE MOLINA,
THE PLAYBOY OF SEVILLE,
TRANSLATED BY ADRIENNE M.
SCHIZZANO AND OSCAR
MANDLL, IN MANDEL, ED.,
THE THEATRE OF DON JUAN
Now the serpent was more
subtle than any other wild
creature that the LORD
GOD had made. He said
to the woman, "Did God
say, 'You shall not cat of
Create Temptation • 233
She was not married, she had no child. Months after he had left her,
she had realized that she had been the victim of a consummate seducer. She
still loved Don Juan, but she was determined to turn the tables. Finding out
through a mutual friend that he had returned to Madrid, she took the five
thousand pesetas he had sent her and bought expensive clothes. She bor-
rowed a neighbor's child, asked the neighbor's cousin to play the child's
nursemaid, and rented a coach—all to create an elaborate fantasy that ex-
isted only in his mind. Cristeta did not even have to lie: she never actually
said she was married or had a child. She knew that being unable to have her
would make him want her more than ever. It was the only way to seduce a
man like him.
Overwhelmed by the lengths she had gone to, and by the emotions she
had so skillfully stirred in him, Don Juan forgave Cristeta and offered to
marry her. To his surprise, and perhaps to his relief, she politely declined.
The moment they married, she said, his eyes would wander elsewhere.
Only if they stayed as they were could she maintain the upper hand. Don
Juan had no choice but to agree.
Interpretation. Cristeta and Don Juan are characters in the novel Dulce y
Sabrosa (Sweet and Savory, 1891), by the Spanish writer Jacinto Octavio
Picon. Most of Picon's work deals with male seducers and their feminine
victims, a subject he studied and knew much about. Abandoned by Don
Juan, and reflecting on his nature, Cristeta decided to kill two birds with
one stone: she would get revenge and get him back. But how could she
lure such a man? The fruit once tasted, he no longer wanted it. What came
easily to him, or fell into his arms, held no allure for him. What would
tempt Don Juan into desiring Cristeta again, into pursuing her, was the
sense that she was already taken, that she was forbidden fruit. That was his
weakness—that was why he pursued virgins and married women, women
he was not supposed to have. To a man, she reasoned, the grass always
seems greener somewhere else. She would make herself that distant, allur-
ing object, just out of reach, tantalizing him, stirring up emotions he could
not control. He knew how charming and desirable she had once been to
him. The idea of possessing her again, and the pleasure he imagined it
would bring, were too much for him: he swallowed the bait.
Temptation is a twofold process. First you are coquettish, flirtatious;
you stimulate a desire by promising pleasure and distraction from daily life.
At the same time, you make it clear to your targets that they cannot have
you, at least not right away. You are establishing a barrier, some kind of
tension.
In days gone by such barriers were easy to create, by taking advantage
of preexisting social obstacles—of class, race, marriage, religion. Today the
barriers have to be more psychological: your heart is taken by someone
else; you are really not interested in the target; some secret holds you back;
the timing is bad; you are not good enough for the other person; the otherany tree of the garden'?"
And the woman said to the
serpent, "We may eat of
the fruit of the trees of the
garden; but God said,
'You shall not eat of the
fruit of the tree which is in
the midst of the garden,
neither shall you touch it,
lest you die.' " But the
serpent said to the woman,
"You will not die. For
God knows that when you
eat of it your eyes will be
opened, and you will be
like God, knowing good
and evil. " So when the
woman saw that the tree
was good for food, and that
it was a delight to the eyes,
and that the tree was to be
desired to make one wise,
she took of its fruit and
ate; and she also gave some
to her husband, and he ate.
—GENESIS 3:1 , OLD TESTAMENT
Thou strong seducer,
Opportunity.
—-JOHN DRYDEN
As he listened, Masetto
experienced such a longing
to go and stay with these
nuns that his whole body
tingled with excitement, for
it was clear from what he
had heard that he should
be able to achieve what he
had in mind. Realizing,
however, that he would get
nowhere by revealing his
intentions to Nuto, he
replied: • "How right you
were to come away from
the [nunnery]! What sort
of a life can any man lead
when he's surrounded by a
lot of women? He might as
well be living with a pack
of devils. Why, six times
out oj seven they don't
even know their own
minds." • But when they
