66 • The Art of Seduction
Dangers
Achildish quality can be charming but it can also be irritating; the inno-
cent have no experience of the world, and their sweetness can prove
cloying. In Milan Kundera's novel The Book of Laughter and Forgetting, the
hero dreams that he is trapped on an island with a group of children. Soon
their wonderful qualities become intensely annoying to him; after a few
days of exposure to them he cannot relate to them at all. The dream turns
into a nightmare, and he longs to be back among adults, with real things to
do and talk about. Because total childishness can quickly grate, the most se-
ductive Naturals are those who, like Josephine Baker, combine adult expe-
rience and wisdom with a childlike manner. It is this mixture of qualities
that is most alluring.
Society cannot tolerate too many Naturals. Given a crowd of Cora
Pearls or Charlie Chaplins, their charm would quickly wear off. In any case
it is usually only artists, or people with abundant leisure time, who can af-
ford to go all the way. The best way to use the Natural character type is in
specific situations when a touch of innocence or impishness will help lower
your target's defenses. A con man plays dumb to make the other person
trust him and feel superior. This kind of feigned naturalness has countless
applications in daily life, where nothing is more dangerous than looking
smarter than the next person; the Natural pose is the perfect way to disguise
your cleverness. But if you are uncontrollably childish and cannot turn it
off, you run the risk of seeming pathetic, earning not sympathy but pity
and disgust.
Similarly, the seductive traits of the Natural work best in one who is
still young enough for them to seem natural. They are much harder for an
older person to pull off. Cora Pearl did not seem so charming when she
was still wearing her pink flouncy dresses in her fifties. The Duke of Buck-
ingham, who seduced everyone in the English court in the 1620s (includ-
ing the homosexual King James I himself), was wondrously childish in
looks and manner; but this became obnoxious and off-putting as he grew
older, and he eventually made enough enemies that he ended up being mur-
dered. As you age, then, your natural qualities should suggest more the
child's open spirit, less an innocence that will no longer convince anyone.
The
ability to delay satisfaction is
the ultimate art of seduction—while
waiting, the victim is held in thrall. Coquettes
are the grand masters of this game, orchestrating a
back-and-forth movement between hope and frustration.
They bait with the promise of reward—the hope of physical
pleasure, happiness, fame by association, power—all of which,
however, proves elusive; yet this only makes their targets pursue
them the more. Coquettes seem totally self-sufficient: they do
not need you, they seem to say, and their narcissism proves devil-
ishly attractive. You want to conquer them but they hold the cards.
The strategy of the Coquette is never to offer total satisfaction.
Imitate the alternating heat and coolness of the Coquette
and you will keep the seduced at your heels.
