104 • The Art of Seduction
have sensed the trick he was playing on her, and could have confidently
picked out his pampered face in the crowd. The following year, her visions
abandoned her, and her confidence as well—she made many mistakes,
leading to her capture by the English. She was indeed human.
We may no longer believe in miracles, but anything that hints at
strange, unworldly, even supernatural powers will create charisma. The psy-
chology is the same: you have visions of the future, and of the wondrous
things you can accomplish. Describe these things in great detail, with an air
of authority, and suddenly you stand out. And if your prophecy—of pros-
perity, say—is just what people want to hear, they are likely to fall under
your spell and to see later events as a confirmation of your predictions. Ex-
hibit remarkable confidence and people will think your confidence comes
from real knowledge. You will create a self-fulfilling prophecy: people's be-
lief in you will translate into actions that help realize your visions. Any hint
of success will make them see miracles, uncanny powers, the glow of
charisma.
The authentic animal. One day in 1905, the St. Petersburg salon of
Countess Ignatiev was unusually full. Politicians, society ladies, and courtiers
had all arrived early to await the remarkable guest of honor: Grigori Efi-
movich Rasputin, a forty-year-old Siberian monk who had made a name
for himself throughout Russia as a healer, perhaps a saint. When Rasputin
arrived, few could disguise their disappointment: his face was ugly, his hair
was stringy, he was gangly and awkward. They wondered why they had
come. But then Rasputin approached them one by one, wrapping his big
hands around their fingers and gazing deep into their eyes. At first his gaze
was unsettling: as he looked them up and down, he seemed to be probing
and judging them. Yet suddenly his expression would change, and kindness,
joy, and understanding would radiate from his face. Several of the ladies he
actually hugged, in a most effusive manner. This startling contrast had pro-
found effects.
The mood in the salon soon changed from disappointment to excite-
ment. Rasputin's voice was so calm and deep; his language was coarse, yet
the ideas it expressed were delightfully simple, and had the ring of great
spiritual truth. Then, just as the guests were beginning to relax with this
dirty-looking peasant, his mood suddenly changed to anger: "I know you,
I can read your souls. You are all too pampered. . . . These fine clothes and
arts of yours are useless and pernicious. Men must learn to humble them-
selves! You must be simpler, far, far simpler. Only then will God come
nearer to you." The monk's face grew animated, his pupils expanded, he
looked completely different. How impressive that angry look was, recalling
Jesus throwing the moneylenders from the temple. Now Rasputin calmed
down, returned to being gracious, but the guests already saw him as some-
one strange and remarkable. Next, in a performance he would soon repeat"How peculiar
[Rasputin's] eyes are,"
confesses a woman who
had made efforts to resist
his influence. She goes on
to say that every time she
met him she was always
amazed afresh at the power
of his glance, which it was
impossible to withstand for
any considerable time.
There was something
oppressive in this kind and
gentle, but at the same
time sly and cunning,
glance; people were helpless
under the spell of the
powerful will which could
be felt in his whole being.
However tired you might
be of this charm, and
however much you wanted
to escape it, somehow or
other you always found
yourself attracted back and
held. • A young girl who
had heard of the strange
new saint came from her
province to the capital, and
visited him in search of
edification and spiritual
instruction. She had never
seen either him or a
portrait of him before, and
met him for the first time
in his house. When he
came up to her and spoke
to her, she thought him like
one of the peasant
preachers she had often
seen in her own country
home. His gentle, monastic
gaze and the plainly parted
light brown hair around the
worthy simple face, all at
first inspired her confidence.
But when he came nearer
to her, she felt immediately
that another quite different
man, mysterious, crafty,
and corrupting, looked out
from behind the eyes that
radiated goodness and
gentleness. • He sat down
opposite her, edged quite
close up to her, and his
light blue eyes changed
color, and became deep and
The Charismatic • 105
in salons throughout the city, he led the guests in a folk song, and as they
sang, he began to dance, a strange uninhibited dance of his own design,
and as he danced, he circled the most attractive women there, and with his
eyes invited them to join him. The dance turned vaguely sexual; as his
partners fell under his spell, he whispered suggestive comments in their
ears. Yet none of them seemed to be offended.
Over the next few months, women from every level of St. Petersburg
society visited Rasputin in his apartment. He would talk to them of spiri-
tual matters, but then without warning he would turn sexual, murmuring
the crassest come-ons. He would justify himself through spiritual dogma:
how can you repent if you have not sinned? Salvation only comes to those
who go astray. One of the few who rejected his advances was asked by a
friend, "How can one refuse anything to a saint?" "Does a saint need sinful
love?" she replied. Her friend said, "He makes everything that comes near
him holy. I have already belonged to him, and I am proud and happy to
have done so." "But you are married! What does your husband say?" "He
considers it a very great honor. If Rasputin desires a woman we all think it
a blessing and a distinction, our husbands as well as ourselves."
Rasputin's spell soon extended over Czar Nicholas and more particu-
larly over his wife, the Czarina Alexandra, after he apparently healed their
son from a life-threatening injury. Within a few years, he had become the
most powerful man in Russia, with total sway over the royal couple.
People are more complicated than the masks they wear in society. The man
who seems so noble and gentle is probably disguising a dark side, which
will often come out in strange ways; if his nobility and refinement are in
fact a put-on, sooner or later the truth will out, and his hypocrisy will dis-
appoint and alienate. On the other hand, we are drawn to people who
seem more comfortably human, who do not bother to disguise their con-
tradictions. This was the source of Rasputin's charisma. A man so authenti-
cally himself, so devoid of self-consciousness or hypocrisy, was immensely
appealing. His wickedness and saintliness were so extreme that it made him
seem larger than life. The result was a charismatic aura that was immediate
and preverbal; it radiated from his eyes, and from the touch of his hands.
Most of us are a mix of the devil and the saint, the noble and the igno-
ble, and we spend our lives trying to repress the dark side. Few of us can
give free rein to both sides, as Rasputin did, but we can create charisma to a
smaller degree by ridding ourselves of self-consciousness, and of the dis-
comfort most of us feel about our complicated natures. You cannot help
being the way you are, so be genuine. That is what attracts us to animals:
beautiful and cruel, they have no self-doubt. That quality is doubly fasci-
nating in humans. Outwardly people may condemn your dark side, but it is
not virtue alone that creates charisma; anything extraordinary will do. Do
not apologize or go halfway. The more unbridled you seem, the more mag-
netic the effect.dark. A keen glance
reached her from the corner
of his eyes, bored into her,
and held her fascinated.
A leaden heaviness
overpowered her limbs as
his great wrinkled face,
distorted with desire, came
closer to hers. She felt his
hot breath on her cheeks,
and saw how his eyes,
burning from the depths of
their sockets, furtively roved
over her helpless body, until
he dropped his lids with a
sensuous expression. His
voice had fallen to a
passionate whisper, and he
murmured strange,
voluptuous words in her
ear. • Just as she was on
the point of abandoning
herself to her seducer, a
memory stirred in her
dimly and as if from some
far distance; she recalled
that she had come to ask
him about God.
—RENÉ FÜLÖP-MILLER,
RASPUTIN: THE HOLY DEVIL
