404 • The Art of Seduction
turns to a state of innocence. You can partly create that feeling through a
devil-may-care attitude. You do not worry about the world, or what peo-
ple think of you; you do not judge your target in any way. Part of Flynn's
appeal was his total acceptance of a woman. He was not interested in a par-
ticular body type, a woman's race, her level of education, her political be-
liefs. He was in love with her feminine presence. He was luring her into an
adventure, free of society's strictures and moral judgments. With him she
could act out a fantasy—which, for many, was the chance to be aggressive
or transgressive, to experience danger. So empty yourself of your tendency
to moralize and judge. You have lured your targets into a momentary world
of pleasure—soft and accommodating, all rules and taboos thrown out the
window.
Symbol: The Raft. Floating out to sea, drifting with the current. Soon the shore-
line disappears from sight, and the two of you are alone. The water invites you to
forget all cares and worries, to submerge yourself. Without anchor or direction, cut
off from the past, you give in to the drifting sensation and slowly lose all restraint.
Reversal
Some people panic when they sense they are falling into the moment.
Often, using spiritual lures will help disguise the increasingly physical
nature of the seduction. That is how the lesbian seductress Natalie Barney
operated. In her heyday, at the turn of the twentieth century, lesbian sex
was immensely transgressive, and women new to it often felt a sense of
shame or dirtiness. Barney led them into the physical, but so enveloped it
in poetry and mysticism that they relaxed and felt purified by the experi-
ence. Today, few people feel repulsed by their sexual nature, but many are
uncomfortable with their bodies. A purely physical approach will frighten
and disturb them. Instead, make it seem a spiritual, mystical union, and
they will take less notice of your physical manipulations.
Master the Art of the Bold Move
A moment has
arrived: your victim clearly desires you,
but is not ready to admit it openly, let alone act on it.
This is the time to throw aside chivalry, kindness, and coquetry
and to overwhelm with a bold move. Don't give the victim time to consider
the consequences; create conflict, stir up tension, so that the bold move comes as
a great release. Showing hesitation or awkwardness means you are thinking of
yourself, as opposed to being overwhelmed by the victim's charms. Never hold
back or meet the target halfway, under the belief that you are being
correct and considerate; you must be seductive now, not
political. One person must go on the of-
fensive, and it is you.
