354 • The Art of Seduction
ted. Byron arrived on the scene at the right time. He became the lightning
rod for women's unexpressed desires; with him they could go beyond the
limits society had imposed. For some the lure was adultery, for others it was
romantic rebellion, or a chance to become irrational and uncivilized. (The
desire to reform him merely covered up the truth—the desire to be over-
whelmed by him.) In all cases it was the lure of the forbidden, which in this
case was more than merely a superficial temptation: once you became in-
volved with Lord Byron, he took you further than you had imagined or
wanted, since he recognized no limits. Women did not just fall in love with
him, they let him turn their lives upside down, even ruin them. They pre-
ferred that fate to the safe confines of marriage.
In some ways, the situation of women in the early nineteenth century
has become generalized in the early twenty-first. The outlets for male bad
behavior—war, dirty politics, the institution of mistresses and courtesans—
have faded away; today, not just women but men are supposed to be emi-
nently civilized and reasonable. And many have a hard time living up to
this. As children we are able to vent the darker side of our characters, a side
that all of us have. But under pressure from society (at first in the form
of our parents), we slowly repress the naughty, rebellious, perverse streaks
in our characters. To get along, we learn to repress our dark sides, which
become a kind of lost self, a part of our psyche buried beneath our polite
appearance.
As adults, we secretly want to recapture that lost self—the more adven-
turous, less respectful, childhood part of us. We are drawn to those who
live out their lost selves as adults, even if it involves some evil or destruc-
tion. Like Byron, you can become the lightning rod for such desires. You
must learn, however, to keep this potential under control, and to use it
strategically. As the aura of the forbidden around you is drawing targets into
your web, do not overplay your dangerousness, or they will be frightened
away. Once you feel them falling under your spell, you have freer rein. If
they begin to imitate you, as Lady Caroline imitated Byron, then take it
further—mix in some cruelty, involve them in sin, crime, taboo activity,
whatever it takes. Unleash the lost self within them; the more they act it
out, the deeper your hold over them. Going halfway will break the spell
and create self-consciousness. Take it as far as you can.
Baseness attracts everybody.
—JOHANN WOLFGANG GOETHE
Keys to Seduction
Society and culture are based on limits—this kind of behavior is accept-
able, that is not. The limits are fluid and change with time, but there are
always limits. The alternative is anarchy, the lawlessness of nature, which we
dread. But we are strange animals: the moment any kind of limit is im-This is how Monsieur
Maudair analyzed men's
attitude toward prostitutes:
"Neither the love of a
passionate but well-
brought-up mistress, nor
his marriage to a woman
whom he respects, can
replace the prostitute for the
human animal in those
perverse moments when he
covets the pleasure of
debasing himself without
affecting his social prestige.
Nothing can replace this
bizarre and powerful
pleasure of being able to
say everything, do
everything, profane and
parody without any fear of
retribution, remorse, or
responsibility. It is a
complete revolt against
organized society, his
organized, educated self
and especially his
religion." Monsieur
Mauclair hears the call of
the Devil in this dark
passion poetized by
Baudelaire. "The
prostitute represents the
unconscious which enables
us to put aside our
responsibilities."
—NINA EPTON,
LOVE AND THE FRENCH
Hearts and eye go traveling
along the paths that have
always brought them joy;
and if anyone attempts to
spoil their game, he only
makes them the more
passionate about it, God
knows. . . . so it was with
Tristan and Isolde. As
soon as they were forbidden
their desires, and prevented
from enjoying one another
by spies and guards, they
began to suffer intensely.
Desire now seriously
tormented them by its
magic, many times worse
than before; their need for
one another was more
Stir Up the Transgressive and Taboo • 355
posed, physically or psychologically, we are instantly curious. A part of us
wants to go beyond that limit, to explore what is forbidden.
If, as children, we are told not to go past a certain point in the woods,
that is precisely where we want to go. But we grow older, and become po-
lite and deferential; more and more boundaries encumber our lives. Do not
confuse politeness with happiness, however. It covers up frustration, un-
wanted compromise. How can we explore the shadow side of our person-
ality without incurring punishment or ostracism? It seeps out in our
dreams. We sometimes wake up with a sense of guilt at the murder, incest,
adultery, and mayhem that goes on in our dreams, until we realize no one
needs to know about it but ourselves. But give a person the sense that with
you they will have a chance to explore the outer reaches of acceptable, po-
lite behavior, that with you they can vent some of their closeted person-
ality, and you create the ingredients for a deep and powerful seduction.
You will have to go beyond the point of merely teasing them with an
elusive fantasy. The shock and seductive power will come from the reality
of what you are offering them. Like Byron, at a certain point you can even
press it further than they may want to go. If they have followed you merely
out of curiosity, they may feel some fear and hesitation, but once they are
hooked, they will fond you hard to resist, for it is hard to return to a limit
once you have transgressed and gone past it. The human cries out for more,
and does not know when to stop. You will determine for them when it is
time to stop.
The moment people feel that something is prohibited, a part of them
will want it. That is what makes a married man or woman such a delicious
target—the more someone is prohibited, the greater the desire. George Vil-
liers, the Earl of Buckingham, was the favorite first of King James I, then of
James's son, King Charles I. Nothing was ever denied him. In 1625, on a
visit to France, he met the beautiful Queen Anne and fell hopelessly in
love. What could be more impossible, more out of reach, than the queen of
a rival power? He could have had almost any other woman, but the prohib-
ited nature of the queen completely enflamed him, until he embarrassed
himself and his country by trying to kiss her in public.
Since what is forbidden is desired, somehow you must make yourself
seem forbidden. The most blatant way to do this is to engage in behavior
that gives you a dark and forbidden aura. Theoretically you are someone to
avoid; in fact you are too seductive to resist. That was the allure of the actor
Errol Flynn, who, like Byron, often found himself the pursued rather than
the pursuer. Flynn was devilishly handsome, but he also had something
else: a definite criminal streak. In his wild youth he engaged in all kinds of
shady activities. In the 1950s he was charged with rape, a permanent stain
on his reputation even though he was acquitted; but his popularity among
women only increased. Play up your dark side and you will have a similar
effect. For your targets to be involved with you means going beyond their
limits, doing something naughty and unacceptable—to society, to their
peers. For many that is reason to bite the bait.painful and urgent than it
had ever been. • . . .
Women do lots of things
just because they are
forbidden, which they
would certainly not
do if they were not
forbidden. . . . Our Lord
God gave Eve the freedom
to do what she would with
all the fruits, flowers, and
plants there were in
Paradise, except for only
one, which he forbade
her to touch on pain of
death. . . . She look the
fruit and broke God's
commandment . . . but it
is my firm belief now that
Eve would never have done
this, if she had not been
forbidden to.
—GOTTFRIED VON STRASSBURG,
TRISTAN UND ISOLDE, QUOTED
IN ANDREA HOPKINS, THE
BOOK OF COURTLY LOVE
One of Monsieur Leopold
Stern's friends rented a
bachelor's pied-à-terre
where he received his wife
as a mistress, served her
with port and petits-fours
and "experienced all the
tingling excitement of
adultery." He told Stern
that it was a delightful
sensation to cuckold
himself.
—NINA EPTON,
LOVE AND THE FRENCH
