The Coquette • 75
cessant attention to gain her love, and failing. For the narcissistic woman is
not emotionally needy; she is self-sufficient. And this is surprisingly seduc-
tive. Self-esteem is critical in seduction. (Your attitude toward yourself is
read by the other person in subtle and unconscious ways.) Low self-esteem
repels, confidence and self-sufficiency attract. The less you seem to need
other people, the more likely others will be drawn to you. Understand the
importance of this in all relationships and you will find your neediness
easier to suppress. But do not confuse self-absorption with seductive narcis-
sism. Talking endlessly about yourself is eminently anti-seductive, revealing
not self-sufficiency but insecurity.
The Coquette is traditionally thought of as female, and certainly the
strategy was for centuries one of the few weapons women had to engage
and enslave a man's desire. One ploy of the Coquette is the withdrawal of
sexual favors, and we see women using this trick throughout history: the
great seventeenth-century French courtesan Ninon de l'Enclos was desired
by all the preeminent men of France, but only attained real power when
she made it clear that she would no longer sleep with a man as part of her
duty. This drove her admirers to despair, which she knew how to make
worse by favoring a man temporarily, granting him access to her body for a
few months, then returning him to the pack of the unsatisfied. Queen
Elizabeth I of England took coquettishness to the extreme, deliberately
arousing the desires of her courtiers but sleeping with none of them.
Long a tool of social power for women, coquettishness was slowly adapted
by men, particularly the great seducers of the seventeenth and eighteenth
centuries who envied the power of such women. One seventeenth-century
seducer, the Duc de Lauzun, was a master at exciting a woman, then sud-
denly acting aloof. Women went wild over him. Today, coquetry is gender-
less. In a world that discourages direct confrontation, teasing, coldness, and
selective aloofness are a form of indirect power that brilliantly disguises its
own aggression.
The Coquette must first and foremost be able to excite the target of his
or her attention. The attraction can be sexual, the lure of celebrity, what-
ever it takes. At the same time, the Coquette sends contrary signals that
stimulate contrary responses, plunging the victim into confusion. The
eponymous heroine of Marivaux's eighteenth-century French novel Mari-
anne is the consummate Coquette. Going to church, she dresses tastefully,
but leaves her hair slightly uncombed. In the middle of the service she
seems to notice this error and starts to fix it, revealing her bare arm as she
does so; such things were not to be seen in an eighteenth-century church,
and all male eyes fix on her for that moment. The tension is much more
powerful than if she were outside, or were tartily dressed. Remember: ob-
vious flirting will reveal your intentions too clearly. Better to be ambiguous
and even contradictory, frustrating at the same time that you stimulate.
The great spiritual leader Jiddu Krishnamurti was an unconscious co-
quette. Revered by theosophists as their "World Teacher," Krishnamurti was
also a dandy. He loved elegant clothing and was devilishly handsome. At theSocrates, pull me up if
anything I say is false. I
allowed myself to be alone
with him, I say,
gentlemen, and I naturally
supposed that he would
embark on conversation of
the type that a lover
usually addresses to his
darling when they are
tête-à-tête, and I was
glad. Nothing of the kind;
he spent the day with me
in the sort of talk which is
habitual with him, and
then left me and went
away. Next I invited him
to train with me in the
gymnasium, and I
accompanied him there,
believing that I should
succeed with him now. He
took exercise and wrestled
with me frequently, with
no one else present, but I
need hardly say that I was
no nearer my goal. Finding
that this was no good
either, I resolved to make a
direct assault on him, and
not to give up what I had
once undertaken; I felt that
I must get to the bottom of
the matter. So I invited
him to dine with me,
behaving just like a lover
who has designs upon his
favourite. He was in no
hurry to accept this
invitation, but at last he
agreed to come. The first
time he came he rose to go
away immediately after
dinner, and on that occasion
I was ashamed and let him
go. But I returned to the
attack, and this time I kept
him in conversation after
dinner far into the night,
and then, when he wanted
to be going, I compelled
him to stay, on the plea
that it was too late for him
to go. • So he betook
himself to rest, using as a
bed the couch on which he
had reclined at dinner, next
to mine, and there was
nobody sleeping in the
76 • The Art of Seduction
same time, he practiced celibacy, and had a horror of being touched. In
1929 he shocked theosophists around the world by proclaiming that he was
not a god or even a guru, and did not want any followers. This only height-
ened his appeal: women fell in love with him in great numbers, and his ad-
visers grew even more devoted. Physically and psychologically, Krishnamurti
was sending contrary signals. While preaching a generalized love and accep-
tance, in his personal life he pushed people away His attractiveness and his
obsession with his appearance might have gained him attention but by
themselves would not have made women fall in love with him; his lessons of
celibacy and spiritual virtue would have created disciples but not physical
love. The combination of these traits, however, both drew people in and
frustrated them, a coquettish dynamic that created an emotional and physical
attachment to a man who shunned such things. His withdrawal from the
world had the effect of only heightening the devotion of his followers.
Coquetry depends on developing a pattern to keep the other person off
balance. The strategy is extremely effective. Experiencing a pleasure once,
we yearn to repeat it; so the Coquette gives us pleasure, then withdraws it.
The alternation of heat and cold is the most common pattern, and has sev-
eral variations. The eighth-century Chinese Coquette Yang Kuei-Fei to-
tally enslaved the Emperor Ming Huang through a pattern of kindness and
bitterness: having charmed him with kindness, she would suddenly get an-
gry, blaming him harshly for the slightest mistake. Unable to live without
the pleasure she gave him, the emperor would turn the court upside down
to please her when she was angry or upset. Her tears had a similar effect:
what had he done, why was she so sad? He eventually ruined himself and
his kingdom trying to keep her happy. Tears, anger, and the production of
guilt are all the tools of the Coquette. A similar dynamic appears in a lover's
quarrel: when a couple fights, then reconciles, the joys of reconciliation
only make the attachment stronger. Sadness of any sort is also seductive,
particularly if it seems deep-rooted, even spiritual, rather than needy or
pathetic—it makes people come to you.
Coquettes are never jealous—that would undermine their image of
fundamental self-sufficiency. But they are masters at inciting jealousy: by
paying attention to a third party, creating a triangle of desire, they signal to
their victims that they may not be that interested. This triangulation is ex-
tremely seductive, in social contexts as well as erotic ones. Interested in nar-
cissistic women, Freud was a narcissist himself, and his aloofness drove his
disciples crazy. (They even had a name for it—his "god complex.") Behav-
ing like a kind of messiah, too lofty for petty emotions, Freud always main-
tained a distance between himself and his students, hardly ever inviting
them over for dinner, say, and keeping his private life shrouded in mystery.
Yet he would occasionally choose an acolyte to confide in—Carl Jung,
Otto Rank, Lou Andreas-Salomé. The result was that his disciples went
berserk trying to win his favor, to be the one he chose. Their jealousy
when he suddenly favored one of them only increased his power over
them. People's natural insecurities are heightened in group settings; byroom but ourselves. • . . . I
swear by all the gods in
heaven that for anything
that had happened between
us when I got up after
sleeping with Socrates, I
might have been sleeping
with my father or elder
brother. • What do you
suppose to have been my
state of mind after that?
On the one hand I
realized that I had been
slighted, but on the other I
felt a reverence for Socrates'
character, his self-control
and courage . . . The result
was that I could neither
bring myself to be angry
with him and tear myself
away from his society, nor
find a way of subduing
him to my will. . . . I was
utterly disconcerted, and
wandered about in a state
of enslavement to the man
the like of which has never
been known.
—ALCIBIADES, QUOTED IN
PLATO, THE SYMPOSIUM
