The Perfect Climax
Through a campaign of deception—the misleading appearance of a
transformation into goodness—the rake Valmont laid siege to the vir-
tuous young Présidente de Tourvel until the day came when, disturbed by
his confession of love for her, she insisted he leave the château where both
of them were staying as guests. He complied. From Paris, however, he
flooded her with letters, describing his love for her in the most intense
terms; she begged him to stop, and once again he complied. Then, several
weeks later, he paid a surprise visit to the château. In his company Tourvel
was flushed and jumpy, and kept her eyes averted—all signs of his effect on
her. Again she asked him to leave. What have you to fear? he replied, I have
always done what you have asked, I have never forced myself on you. He
kept his distance and she slowly relaxed. She no longer left the room when
he entered, and she could look at him directly. When he offered to accom-
pany her on a walk, she did not refuse. They were friends, she said. She
even put her arm in his as they strolled, a friendly gesture.
One rainy day they could not take their usual walk. He met her in the
hallway as she was entering her room; for the first time, she invited him in.
She seemed relaxed, and Valmont sat near her on a sofa. He talked of his
love for her. She gave the faintest protest. He took her hand; she left it
there and leaned against his arm. Her voice trembled. She looked at him,
and he felt his heart flutter—it was a tender, loving look. She started to
speak—"Well! yes, I . . ."—then suddenly collapsed into his arms, crying. It
was a moment of weakness, yet Valmont held himself back. Her crying be-
came convulsive; she begged him to help her, to leave the room before
something terrible happened. He did so. The following morning he awoke
to some surprising news: in the middle of the night, claiming she was feel-
ing ill, Tourvel had suddenly left the château and returned home.
Valmont did not follow her to Paris. Instead he began staying up late,
and using no powder to hide the peaked looks that soon ensued. He went
to the chapel every day, and dragged himself despondently around the
château. He knew that his hostess would be writing to the Présidente, who
would hear of his sad state. Next he wrote to a church father in Paris, and
asked him to pass along a message to Tourvel: he was ready to change his
life for good. He wanted one last meeting, to say goodbye and to return the
letters she had written him over the last few months. The father arranged aIt afforded, moreover,
another advantage: that of
observing at my leisure her
charming face, more
beautiful than ever, as it
proffered the powerful
enticement of tears. My
blood was on fire, and I
was so little in control of
myself that I was tempted
to make the most of the
occasion. • How weak we
must be, how strong the
dominion of circumstance,
if even I, without a
thought for my plans, could
risk losing all the charm of
a prolonged struggle, all the
fascination of a laboriously
administered defeat, by
concluding a premature
victory; if distracted by the
most puerile of desires, I
could be willing that the
conqueror of Madame de
Tourvel should take
nothing for the fruit of his
labors but the tasteless
distinction of having added
one more name to the roll.
Ah, let her surrender, but
let her fight! Let her be too
weak to prevail but strong
enough to resist; let her
savor the knowledge of her
weakness at her leisure, but
let her be unwilling to
admit defeat. Leave the
407
408 • The Art of Seduction
meeting, and so, one late afternoon in Paris, Valmont found himself once
again alone with Tourvel, in a room in her house.
The Présidente was clearly on edge; she could not look him in the eye.
They exchanged pleasantries, but then Valmont turned harsh: she had
treated him cruelly, had apparently been determined to make him unhappy.
Well, this was the end, they were separating for good, since that was how
she wanted it. Tourvel argued back: she was a married woman, she had no
choice. Valmont softened his tone and apologized: he was unused to having
such strong feelings, he said, and could not control himself. Still, he would
never trouble her again. Then he laid on a table the letters he had come to
return.
Tourvel came closer: the sight of her letters, and the memory of all the
turmoil they represented, affected her powerfully. She had thought his de-
cision to renounce his libertine way of life was voluntary, she said—with a
touch of bitterness in her voice, as if she resented being abandoned. No, it
was not voluntary, he replied, it was because she had spurned him. Then
he suddenly stepped closer and took her in his arms. She did not resist.
"Adorable woman!" he cried. "You have no idea of the love you inspire.
You will never know how I have worshipped you, how much dearer my
feelings have been to me than life! . . . May [your days] be blessed with all
of the happiness of which you have deprived me!" Then he let her go and
turned to leave.
Tourvel suddenly snapped. "You shall listen to me. I insist," she said,
and grabbed his arm. He turned around and they embraced. This time he
waited no longer, picking her up, carrying her to an ottoman, overwhelm-
ing her with kisses and sweet words of the happiness he now felt. Before
this sudden flood of caresses, all her resistance gave way. "From this mo-
ment on I am yours," she said, "and you will hear neither refusals nor re-
grets from my lips." Tourvel was true to her word, and Valmont's suspicions
were to prove correct: the pleasures he won from her were far greater than
with any other woman he had seduced.
Interpretation. Valmont—a character in Choderlos de Laclos's eighteenth-
century novel Dangerous Liaisons—can sense several things about the Prési-
dente at first glance. She is timid and nervous. Her husband almost
certainly treats her with respect—probably too much of it. Beneath her in-
terest in God, religion, and virtue is a passionate woman, vulnerable to the
lure of a romance and to the flattering attention of an ardent suitor. No
one, not even her husband, has given her this feeling, because they have all
been so daunted by her prudish exterior.
Valmont begins his seduction, then, by being indirect. He knows
Tourvel is secretly fascinated with his bad reputation. By acting as if he is
contemplating a change in his life, he can make her want to reform him—a
desire that is unconsciously a desire to love him. Once she has opened up
ever so slightly to his influence, he strikes at her vanity: she has never felthumble poacher to kill the
stag where he has surprised
it in its hiding place;
the true hunter will
bring it to bay.
—VICOMTE DE VALMONT,
IN CHODERLOS DE LACLOS,
DANGEROUS LIAISONS,
TRANSLATED BY P.W.K. STONE,
IN MICHEL FEHER, ED.,
THE LIBERTINE READER
Don't you know that
however willing, however
eager we are to give
ourselves, we must
nevertheless have an
excuse? And is there any
more convenient than an
appearance of yielding to
force? As for me, I shall
admit that one thing that
most flatters me is a lively
and well-executed attack,
when everything happens
in quick but orderly
succession; which never
puts us in the painfully
embarrassing position of
having to cover up some
blunder of which, on the
contrary, we ought to be
taking advantage; which
keeps up an appearance of
taking by storm even that
which we are quite
prepared to surrender; and
adroitly flatters our two
favorite passions—the
pride of defense and the
pleasure of defeat.
—MARQUISE DE MERTEUIL IN
CHODERLOS DE LACLOS,
DANGEROUS LIAISONS,
TRANSLATED BY P.W.K. STONE
IN MICHEL FEHER, ED.,
THE LIBERTINE READER
What sensible man will
not intersperse his coaxing \
With kisses? Even if she
doesn't kiss back, \ Still
force on regardless! She
may struggle, cry
"Naughty!" \ Yet she
wants to be overcome. Just
