292 • The Art of Seduction
tions: we cannot remain neutral. We feel sympathy, and most often will do
anything to stop the tears—including things that we normally would not
do. Weeping is an incredibly potent tactic, but the weeper is not always so
innocent. There is usually something real behind the tears, but there may
also be an element of acting, of playing for effect. (And if the target senses
this the tactic is doomed.) Beyond the emotional impact of tears, there is
something seductive about sadness. We want to comfort the other person,
and as Tourvel discovered, that desire quickly turns into love. Affecting sad-
ness, even crying sometimes, has great strategic value, even for a man. It is a
skill you can learn. The central character of the eighteenth-century French
novel Marianne, by Marivaux, would think of something sad in her past to
make herself cry or look sad in the present.
Use tears sparingly, and save them for the right moment. Perhaps this
might be a time when the target seems suspicious of your motives, or when
you are worrying about having no effect on him or her. Tears are a sure
barometer of how deeply the other person is falling for you. If they seem
annoyed, or resist the bait, your case is probably hopeless.
In social and political situations, seeming too ambitious, or too con-
trolled, will make people fear you; it is crucial to show your soft side. The
display of a single weakness will hide a multitude of manipulations. Emo-
tion or even tears will work here too. Most seductive of all is playing the
victim. For his first speech in Parliament, Benjamin Disraeli prepared an
elaborate oration, but when he delivered it the opposition yelled and
laughed so loudly that hardly any of it could be heard. He plowed ahead
and gave the whole speech, but by the time he sat down he felt he had
failed miserably. Much to his amazement, his colleagues told him the
speech was a marvelous success. It would have been a failure if he had com-
plained or given up; but by going ahead as he did, he positioned himself as
the victim of a cruel and unreasonable faction. Almost everyone sympa-
thized with him now, which would serve him well in the future. Attacking
your mean-spirited opponents can make you seem ugly as well; instead,
soak up their blows, and play the victim. The public will rally to your side,
in an emotional response that will lay the groundwork for a grand political
seduction.
Symbol: The Blemish. A beautiful face is a delight to look at, but
if it is too perfect it leaves us cold, and even slightly intimidated.
It is the little mole, the beauty mark, that makes the face
human and lovable. So do not conceal all of your
blemishes. You need them to soften your
features and elicit tender
feelings.inconvenience, nor any
surprise or discovery at all.
For indeed the two sisters
had so good an under-
standing between them and
did so generously lend a
hand to each other and so
obligingly play sentinel to
one another, that no ill hap
did ever occur. And he
swore to me, being my very
intimate friend as he was,
that never in his days of
greatest liberty had he
enjoyed so excellent
entertainment or felt keener
ardor or better appetite for
it than in the said
prison—which truly was a
right good prison for him,
albeit folk say no prison
can be good. And this
happy time did continue for
the space of eight months,
till the truce was made
betwixt the Emperor and
Henri II., King of France,
whereby all prisoners did
leave their dungeons and
were released. He sware
that never was he more
grieved than at quitting
this good prison of his, but
was exceeding sorry to
leave these fair maids, with
whom he was in such high
favor, and who did express
all possible regrets at his
departing.
—SEIGNEUR DE BRANTÔME,
LIVES OF FAIR & GALLANT
LADIES, TRANSLATED BY A. R.
ALLINSON
Disarm Through Strategic Weakness and Vulnerability • 293
Reversal
Timing is everything in seduction; you should always look for signs that
the target is falling under your spell. A person falling in love tends to
ignore the other person's weaknesses, or to see them as endearing. An
unseduced, rational person, on the other hand, may find bashfulness or
emotional outbursts pathetic. There are also certain weaknesses that have
no seductive value, no matter how in love the target may be.
The great seventeenth-century courtesan Ninon de l'Enclos liked men
with a soft side. But sometimes a man would go too far, complaining that
she did not love him enough, that she was too fickle and independent, that
he was being mistreated and wronged. For Ninon, such behavior would
break the spell, and she would quickly end the relationship. Complaining,
whining, neediness, and actively appealing for sympathy will appear to your
targets not as charming weaknesses but as manipulative attempts at a kind of
negative power. So when you play the victim, do it subtly, without overad-
vertising it. The only weaknesses worth playing up are the ones that will
make you seem lovable. All others should be repressed and eradicated at all
costs.
