Stir Up the Transgressive and Taboo • 357
ploited the story. A mix of the masculine and the feminine, the violent and
the tender, will always seem transgressive and appealing. Love is supposed
to be tender and delicate, but in fact it can release violent and destructive
emotions; and the possible violence of love, the way it breaks down our
normal reasonableness, is just what attracts us. Approach romance's violent
side by mixing a cruel streak into your tender attentions, particularly in the
latter stages of the seduction, when the target is in your clutches. The
courtesan Lola Montez was known to turn to violence, using a whip now
and then, and Lou Andreas-Salomé could be exceptionally cruel to her
men, playing coquettish games, turning alternately icy and demanding. Her
cruelty only kept her targets coming back for more. A masochistic involve-
ment can represent a great transgressive release.
The more illicit your seduction feels, the more powerful its effect. Give
your targets the feeling that they are committing a kind of crime, a deed
whose guilt they share with you. Create public moments in which the two
of you know something that those around you do not. It could be phrases
and looks that only you recognize, a secret. Byron's seductive appeal to
Lady Frances was connected to the nearness of her husband—in his com-
pany, for example, she had a love letter of Byron's hidden in her bosom. Jo-
hannes, the protagonist of Søren Kierkegaard's The Seducer's Diary, sent a
message to his target, the young Cordelia, in the middle of a dinner party
they were both attending; she could not reveal to the other guests that it
was from him, for then she would have to do some explaining. He might
also say something in public that would have a special meaning for her,
since it referred to something in one of his letters. All of this added spice to
the affair by giving it a feeling of a shared secret, even a guilty crime. It is
critical to play on tensions like these in public, creating a sense of complic-
ity and collusion against the world.
In the Tristan and Isolde legend, the famous lovers reach the heights of
bliss and exhilaration exactly because of the taboos they break. Isolde is en-
gaged to King Mark; she will soon be a married woman. Tristan is a loyal
subject and warrior in the service of King Mark, who is his father's age.
The whole affair has a feeling of stealing away the bride from the father.
Epitomizing the concept of love in the Western world, the legend has
had immense influence over the ages, and a crucial part of it is the idea
that without obstacles, without a feeling of transgression, love is weak and
flavorless.
People may be straining to remove restrictions on private behavior, to
make everything freer, in the world today, but that only makes seduction
more difficult and less exciting. Do what you can to reintroduce a feeling
of transgression and crime, even if it is only psychological or illusory.
There must be obstacles to overcome, social norms to flout, laws to break,
before the seduction can be consummated. It might seem that a permissive
society imposes few limits; find some. There will always be limits, sacred
cows, behavioral standards—endless ammunition for stirring up the trans-
gressive and taboo.
358 • The Art of Seduction
Symbol: The Forest. The children are told not to go into the
forest that lies just beyond the safe confines of their home.
There is no law there, only wilderness, wild animals, and
criminals. But the chance to explore, the alluring dark-
ness, and the fact that it is prohibited are impossi-
ble to resist. And once inside, they want
to go farther and farther.
Reversal
The reversal of stirring up taboos would be to stay within the limits
of acceptable behavior. That would make for a very tepid seduc-
tion. Which is not to say that only evil or wild behavior is seductive; good-
ness, kindness, and an aura of spirituality can be tremendously attractive,
since they are rare qualities. But notice that the game is the same. A person
who is kind or good or spiritual within the limits that society prescribes has
a weak appeal. It is those who go to the extreme—the Gandhis, the Krish-
namurtis—who seduce us. They do not merely expound a spiritual life-
style, they do away with all personal material comfort to live out their
ascetic ideals. They too go beyond the limits, transgressing acceptable be-
havior, because societies would find it hard to function if everyone went
to such lengths. In seduction, there is absolutely no power in respecting
boundaries and limits.
