Stir Up the Transgressive and Taboo • 355
posed, physically or psychologically, we are instantly curious. A part of us
wants to go beyond that limit, to explore what is forbidden.
If, as children, we are told not to go past a certain point in the woods,
that is precisely where we want to go. But we grow older, and become po-
lite and deferential; more and more boundaries encumber our lives. Do not
confuse politeness with happiness, however. It covers up frustration, un-
wanted compromise. How can we explore the shadow side of our person-
ality without incurring punishment or ostracism? It seeps out in our
dreams. We sometimes wake up with a sense of guilt at the murder, incest,
adultery, and mayhem that goes on in our dreams, until we realize no one
needs to know about it but ourselves. But give a person the sense that with
you they will have a chance to explore the outer reaches of acceptable, po-
lite behavior, that with you they can vent some of their closeted person-
ality, and you create the ingredients for a deep and powerful seduction.
You will have to go beyond the point of merely teasing them with an
elusive fantasy. The shock and seductive power will come from the reality
of what you are offering them. Like Byron, at a certain point you can even
press it further than they may want to go. If they have followed you merely
out of curiosity, they may feel some fear and hesitation, but once they are
hooked, they will fond you hard to resist, for it is hard to return to a limit
once you have transgressed and gone past it. The human cries out for more,
and does not know when to stop. You will determine for them when it is
time to stop.
The moment people feel that something is prohibited, a part of them
will want it. That is what makes a married man or woman such a delicious
target—the more someone is prohibited, the greater the desire. George Vil-
liers, the Earl of Buckingham, was the favorite first of King James I, then of
James's son, King Charles I. Nothing was ever denied him. In 1625, on a
visit to France, he met the beautiful Queen Anne and fell hopelessly in
love. What could be more impossible, more out of reach, than the queen of
a rival power? He could have had almost any other woman, but the prohib-
ited nature of the queen completely enflamed him, until he embarrassed
himself and his country by trying to kiss her in public.
Since what is forbidden is desired, somehow you must make yourself
seem forbidden. The most blatant way to do this is to engage in behavior
that gives you a dark and forbidden aura. Theoretically you are someone to
avoid; in fact you are too seductive to resist. That was the allure of the actor
Errol Flynn, who, like Byron, often found himself the pursued rather than
the pursuer. Flynn was devilishly handsome, but he also had something
else: a definite criminal streak. In his wild youth he engaged in all kinds of
shady activities. In the 1950s he was charged with rape, a permanent stain
on his reputation even though he was acquitted; but his popularity among
women only increased. Play up your dark side and you will have a similar
effect. For your targets to be involved with you means going beyond their
limits, doing something naughty and unacceptable—to society, to their
peers. For many that is reason to bite the bait.painful and urgent than it
had ever been. • . . .
Women do lots of things
just because they are
forbidden, which they
would certainly not
do if they were not
forbidden. . . . Our Lord
God gave Eve the freedom
to do what she would with
all the fruits, flowers, and
plants there were in
Paradise, except for only
one, which he forbade
her to touch on pain of
death. . . . She look the
fruit and broke God's
commandment . . . but it
is my firm belief now that
Eve would never have done
this, if she had not been
forbidden to.
—GOTTFRIED VON STRASSBURG,
TRISTAN UND ISOLDE, QUOTED
IN ANDREA HOPKINS, THE
BOOK OF COURTLY LOVE
One of Monsieur Leopold
Stern's friends rented a
bachelor's pied-à-terre
where he received his wife
as a mistress, served her
with port and petits-fours
and "experienced all the
tingling excitement of
adultery." He told Stern
that it was a delightful
sensation to cuckold
himself.
—NINA EPTON,
LOVE AND THE FRENCH
356 • The Art of Seduction
In Junichiro Tanazaki's 1928 novel Quicksand, Sonoko Kakiuchi, the
wife of a respectable lawyer, is bored and decides to take art classes to wile
away the time. There, she finds herself fascinated with a fellow female stu-
dent, the beautiful Mitsuko, who befriends her, then seduces her. Kakiuchi
is forced to tell endless lies to her husband about her involvement with
Mitsuko and their frequent trysts. Mitsuko slowly involves her in all kinds
of nefarious activities, including a love triangle with a bizarre young man.
Each time Kakiuchi is made to explore some forbidden pleasure, Mitsuko
challenges her to go further and further. Kakiuchi hesitates, feels remorse—
she knows she is in the clutches of a devilish young seductress who has
played on her boredom to lead her astray. But in the end, she cannot help
following Mitsuko's lead—each transgressive act makes her want more.
Once your targets are drawn by the lure of the forbidden, dare them to
match you in transgressive behavior. Any kind of challenge is seductive.
Take it slowly heightening the challenge only after they show signs of
yielding to you. Once they are under your spell, they may not even notice
how far out on a limb you have taken them.
The great eighteenth-century rake Duc de Richelieu had a prediliction
for young girls and he would often heighten the seduction by enveloping
them in transgressive behavior, to which the young are particularly suscep-
tible. For instance, he would find a way into the young girl's house and lure
her into her bed; the parents would be just down the hall, adding the
proper spice. Sometimes he would act as if they were about to be discov-
ered, the momentary fright sharpening the overall thrill. In all cases, he
would try to turn the young girl against her parents, ridiculing their reli-
gious zeal or prudery or pious behavior. The duke's stategy was to attack
the values that his targets held dearest—precisely the values that represent a
limit. In a young person, family ties, religious ties, and the like are useful to
the seducer; young people barely need a reason to rebel against them. The
strategy, though, can be applied to a person of any age: for every deeply
held value there is a shadow side, a doubt, a desire to explore what those
values forbid.
In Renaissance Italy, a prostitute would dress as a lady and go to
church. Nothing was more exciting to a man than to exchange glances
with a woman whom he knew to be a whore as he was surrounded by his
wife, family, peers, and church officials. Every religion or value system
creates a dark side, the shadow realm of everything it prohibits. Tease your
targets, get them to flirt with whatever transgresses their family values,
which are often emotional yet superficial, since they are imposed from the
outside.
One of the most seductive men of the twentieth century, Rudolph
Valentino, was known as the Sex Menace. His appeal for women was
twofold: he could be tender and attentive, but he also hinted of cruelty. At
any moment he could become dangerously bold, perhaps even a little vio-
lent. The studios played up this double image as much as possible—when it
was reported that he had been abusive to his wife, for example, they ex-
