72 • The Art of Seduction
baffled and intrigued by the coldness of Warhol's work; they could not fig-
ure out how the artist felt about his subjects. What was his position? What
was he trying to say? When they asked, he would simply reply, "I just do it
because I like it," or, "I love soup." The critics went wild with their inter-
pretations: "An art like Warhol's is necessarily parasitic upon the myths of
its time," one wrote; another, "The decision not to decide is a paradox that
is equal to an idea which expresses nothing but then gives it dimension."
The show was a huge success, establishing Warhol as a leading figure in a
new movement, pop art.
In 1963, Warhol rented a large Manhattan loft space that he called the
Factory, and that soon became the hub of a large entourage—hangers-on,
actors, aspiring artists. Here, particularly at night, Warhol would simply
wander about, or stand in a corner. People would gather around him, fight
for his attention, throw questions at him, and he would answer, in his non-
committal way. But no one could get close to him, physically or mentally;
he would not allow it. At the same time, if he walked by you without giv-
ing you his usual "Oh, hi," you were devastated. He hadn't noticed you;
perhaps you were on the way out.
Increasingly interested in filmmaking, Warhol cast his friends in his
movies. In effect he was offering them a kind of instant celebrity (their
"fifteen minutes of fame"—the phrase is Warhol's). Soon people were
competing for roles. He groomed women in particular for stardom: Edie
Sedgwick, Viva, Nico. Just being around him offered a kind of celebrity by
association. The Factory became the place to be seen, and stars like Judy
Garland and Tennessee Williams would go to parties there, rubbing elbows
with Sedgwick, Viva, and the bohemian lower echelons whom Warhol had
befriended. People began sending limos to bring him to parties of their
own; his presence alone was enough to turn a social evening into a scene—
even though he would pass through in near silence, keeping to himself and
leaving early.
In 1967, Warhol was asked to lecture at various colleges. He hated to
talk, particularly about his own art; "The less something has to say," he felt,
"the more perfect it is." But the money was good and Warhol always found
it hard to say no. His solution was simple: he asked an actor, Allen
Midgette, to impersonate him. Midgette was dark-haired, tan, part Chero-
kee Indian. He did not resemble Warhol in the least. But Warhol and
friends covered his face with powder, sprayed his brown hair silver, gave
him dark glasses, and dressed him in Warhol's clothes. Since Midgette knew
nothing about art, his answers to students' questions tended to be as short
and enigmatic as Warhol's own. The impersonation worked. Warhol may
have been an icon, but no one really knew him, and since he often wore
dark glasses, even his face was unfamiliar in any detail. The lecture audi-
ences were far enough away to be teased by the thought of his presence,
and no one got close enough to catch the deception. He remained elusive.
* * *looking round in every
direction. . . . He looked
behind him, and when no
one appeared, cried again:
"Why are you avoiding
me?" But all he heard
were his own words echoed
back. Still he persisted,
deceived by what he took to
be another's voice, and
said, "Come here, and let
us meet!" Echo answered:
"Let us meet!" Never
again would she reply more
willingly to any sound. To
make good her words she
came out of the wood and
made to throw her arms
round the neck she loved:
but he fled from her, crying
as he did so, "Away with
these embraces! I would die
before I would have you
touch me!" . . . Thus
scorned, she concealed
herself in the woods, hiding
her shamed face in the
shelter of the leaves, and
ever since that day she
dwells in lonely caves. Yet
still her love remained
firmly rooted in her heart,
and was increased by the
pain of having been
rejected. . . . • Narcissus
had played with her
affections, treating her as he
had previously treated other
spirits of the waters and
the woods, and his male
admirers too. Then one of
those he had scorned raised
up his hands to heaven
and prayed: "May he
himself fall in love with
another, as we have done
with him! May he too be
unable to gain his loved
one!" Nemesis heard and
granted his righteous
prayer. ...• Narcissus,
wearied with hunting in
the heat of the day, lay
down here [by a clear
pool]: for he was attracted
by the beauty of the place,
and by the spring. While
he sought to quench his
thirst, another thirst grew
The Coquette • 73
Early on in life, Andy Warhol was plagued by conflicting emotions: he des-
perately wanted fame, but he was naturally passive and shy "I've always had
a conflict," he later said, "because I'm shy and yet I like to take up a lot of
personal space. Mom always said, 'Don't be pushy, but let everyone know
you're around.' " At first Warhol tried to make himself more aggressive,
straining to please and court. It didn't work. After ten futile years he
stopped trying and gave in to his own passivity—only to discover the power
that withdrawal commands.
Warhol began this process in his artwork, which changed dramatically
in the early 1960s. His new paintings of soup cans, green stamps, and other
widely known images did not assault you with meaning; in fact their mean-
ing was totally elusive, which only heightened their fascination. They drew
you in by their immediacy, their visual power, their coldness. Having trans-
formed his art, Warhol also transformed himself: like his paintings, he be-
came pure surface. He trained himself to hold himself back, to stop talking.
The world is full of people who try, people who impose themselves ag-
gressively. They may gain temporary victories, but the longer they are
around, the more people want to confound them. They leave no space
around themselves, and without space there can be no seduction. Cold Co-
quettes create space by remaining elusive and making others pursue them.
Their coolness suggests a comfortable confidence that is exciting to be
around, even though it may not actually exist; their silence makes you want
to talk. Their self-containment, their appearance of having no need for
other people, only makes us want to do things for them, hungry for the
slightest sign of recognition and favor. Cold Coquettes may be maddening
to deal with—never committing but never saying no, never allowing close-
ness—but more often than not we find ourselves coming back to them, ad-
dicted to the coldness they project. Remember: seduction is a process of
drawing people in, making them want to pursue and possess you. Seem dis-
tant and people will go mad to win your favor. Humans, like nature, hate a
vacuum, and emotional distance and silence make them strain to fill up the
empty space with words and heat of their own. Like Warhol, stand back
and let them fight over you.
[Narcissistic] women have the greatest fascination for
men. . . . The charm of a child lies to a great extent in his
narcissism, his self-sufficiency and inaccessibility, just as
does the charm of certain animals which seem not to con-
cern themselves about us, such as cats. . . . It is as if we
envied them their power of retaining a blissful state of
mind—an unassailable libido-position which we ourselves
have since abandoned.
—SIGMUND FREUDin him, and as he drank,
he was enchanted by the
beautiful reflection that he
saw. He fell in love with
an insubstantial hope,
mistaking a mere shadow
for a real body. Spellbound
by his own self, he
remained there motionless,
with fixed gaze, like a
statue carved from Parian
marble. . . . Unwittingly,
he desired himself, and was
himself the object of his
own approval, at once
seeking and sought, himself
kindling the flame with
which he burned. How
often did he vainly kiss the
treacherous pool, how often
plunge his arms deep in the
waters, as he tried to clasp
the neck he saw! But he
could not lay hold upon
himself. He did not know
what he was looking at,
but was fired by the sight,
and excited by the very
illusion that deceived his
eyes. Poor foolish boy, why
vainly grasp at the fleeting
image that eludes you?
The thing you are seeking
does not exist: only turn
aside and you will lose
what you love. What you
see is but the shadow cast
by your reflection; in itself
it is nothing. It comes with
you, and lasts while you
are there; it will go when
you go, if go you can. . . .
• He laid down his weary
head on the green grass,
and death closed the eyes
which so admired their
owner's beauty. Even then,
when he was received into
the abode of the dead, he
kept looking at himself in
the waters of the Styx. His
sisters, the nymphs of the
spring, mourned for him,
and cut off their hair in
tribute to their brother. The
wood nymphs mourned
him too, and Echo sang her
refrain to their lament. •
The pyre, the tossing
