
Seductive Gravity
In the early 1840s, the center of attention in the French art world was a
young woman named Apollonie Sabatier. She was so much the natural
beauty that sculptors and painters vied to immortalize her in their works,
and she was also charming, easy to talk to, and seductively self-sufficient—
men were drawn to her. Her Paris apartment became a gathering spot for
writers and artists, and soon Madame Sabatier—as she came to be known,
although she was not married—was hosting one of the most important lit-
erary salons in France. Writers such as Gustave Flaubert, the elder Alexan-
dre Dumas, and Theophile Gautier were among her regular guests.
Near the end of 1852, when she was thirty, Madame Sabatier received
an anonymous letter. The writer confessed that he loved her deeply. Wor-
ried that she would find his sentiments ridiculous, he would not reveal his
name; yet he had to let her know that he adored her. Sabatier was used to
such attentions—one man after another had fallen in love with her—but
this letter was different: in this man she seemed to have inspired a quasi-
religious ardor. The letter, written in a disguised handwriting, contained a
poem dedicated to her; titled "To One Who Is Too Gay," it began by prais-
ing her beauty, yet ended with the lines
And so, one night, I'd like to sneak,
When darkness tolls the hour of pleasure,
A craven thief, toward the treasure
Which is your person, plump and sleek. . . .
And, most vertiginous delight!
Into those lips, so freshly striking
And daily lovelier to my liking—
Infuse the venom of my spite.
Mixed in with her admirer's adoration, clearly, was a strange kind of lust,
with a touch of cruelty to it. The poem both intrigued and disturbed
her—and she had no idea who had written it.
A few weeks later another letter arrived. As before, the writer en-
veloped Sabatier in cultlike worship, mixing the physical and the spiritual.
And as before, there was a poem, "All in One," in which he wrote,Omissions, denials,
deflections, deceptions,
diversions, and humility—
all aimed at provoking this
second state, the secret of
true seduction. Vulgar
seduction might proceed by
persistence, but true seduc-
tion proceeds by absence. .
. . It is like fencing: one
needs a field for the feint.
Throughout this period,
the seducer [Johannes], far
from seeking to close in on
her, seeks to maintain his
distance by various ploys:
he does not speak directly
to her but only to her aunt,
and then about trivial or
stupid subjects; he neutral-
izes everything by irony
and feigned pedanticism;
he fails to respond to any
feminine or erotic move-
ment, and even finds her a
sitcom suitor to disenchant
and deceive her, to the
point where she herself
takes the initiative and
breaks off her engagement,
thus completing the
seduction and creating the
ideal situation for her total
abandon.
—JEAN BAUDRILLARD,
SEDUCTION, TRANSLATED BY
BRIAN SINGER
385
