The Coquette • 71
the chase gave Napoleon a masochistic pleasure. He yearned to subdue her
independent spirit, as if she were an enemy in battle.
People are inherently perverse. An easy conquest has a lower value than
a difficult one; we are only really excited by what is denied us, by what we
cannot possess in full. Your greatest power in seduction is your ability to
turn away, to make others come after you, delaying their satisfaction. Most
people miscalculate and surrender too soon, worried that the other person
will lose interest, or that giving the other what he or she wants will grant
the giver a kind of power. The truth is the opposite: once you satisfy some-
one, you no longer have the initiative, and you open yourself to the possi-
bility that he or she will lose interest at the slightest whim. Remember:
vanity is critical in love. Make your targets afraid that you may be with-
drawing, that you may not really be interested, and you arouse their innate
insecurity, their fear that as you have gotten to know them they have be-
come less exciting to you. These insecurities are devastating. Then, once
you have made them uncertain of you and of themselves, reignite their
hope, making them feel desired again. Hot and cold, hot and cold—such
coquetry is perversely pleasurable, heightening interest and keeping the ini-
tiative on your side. Never be put off by your target's anger; it is a sure sign
of enslavement.
She who would long retain her power must use her lover ill.
—OVID
The Cold Coquette
In 1952, the writer Truman Capote, a recent success in literary and social
circles, began to receive an almost daily barrage of fan mail from a young
man named Andy Warhol. An illustrator for shoe designers, fashion maga-
zines, and the like, Warhol made pretty, stylized drawings, some of which
he sent to Capote, hoping the author would include them in one of his
books. Capote did not respond. One day he came home to find Warhol
talking to his mother, with whom Capote lived. And Warhol began to tele-
phone almost daily. Finally Capote put an end to all this: "He seemed one
of those hopeless people that you just know nothing's ever going to happen
to. Just a hopeless, born loser," the writer later said.
Ten years later, Andy Warhol, aspiring artist, had his first one-man
show at the Stable Gallery in Manhattan. On the walls were a series of
silkscreened paintings based on the Campbell's soup can and the Coca-Cola
bottle. At the opening and at the party afterward, Warhol stood to the side,
staring blankly, talking little. What a contrast he was to the older generation
of artists, the abstract expressionists—mostly hard-drinking womanizers full
of bluster and aggression, big talkers who had dominated the art scene for
the previous fifteen years. And what a change from the Warhol who had
badgered Capote, and art dealers and patrons as well. The critics were bothuntil they are begging on
their knees even if it takes
a very long time.
—SIGMUND FREUD, IN A LETTER
TO A PUPIL, QUOTED IN PAUL
ROAZEN, FREUD AND HIS
FOLLOWERS
When her time was come,
that nymph most fair
brought forth a child with
whom one could have
fallen in love even in his
cradle, and she called him
Narcissus. . . . Cephisus's
child had reached his
sixteenth year, and could
be counted as at once boy
and man. Many lads and
many girls fell in love with
him, but his soft young
body housed a pride so
unyielding that none of
those boys or girls dared to
touch him. One day, as he
was driving timid deer into
his nets, he was seen by
that talkative nymph who
cannot stay silent when
another speaks, but yet has
not learned to speak first
herself. Her name is Echo,
and she always answers
back. . . . • So when she
saw Narcissus wandering
through the lonely
countryside, Echo fell in
love with him and followed
secretly in his steps. The
more closely she followed,
the nearer was the fire
which scorched her: just as
sulphur, smeared round the
tops of torches, is quickly
kindled when aflame is
brought near it. How often
she wished to make
flattering overtures to him,
to approach him with
tender pleas! • The boy, by
chance, had wandered
away from his faithful band
of comrades, and he called
out: "Is there anybody
here?" Echo answered:
"Here!" Narcissus stood
still in astonishment,
72 • The Art of Seduction
baffled and intrigued by the coldness of Warhol's work; they could not fig-
ure out how the artist felt about his subjects. What was his position? What
was he trying to say? When they asked, he would simply reply, "I just do it
because I like it," or, "I love soup." The critics went wild with their inter-
pretations: "An art like Warhol's is necessarily parasitic upon the myths of
its time," one wrote; another, "The decision not to decide is a paradox that
is equal to an idea which expresses nothing but then gives it dimension."
The show was a huge success, establishing Warhol as a leading figure in a
new movement, pop art.
In 1963, Warhol rented a large Manhattan loft space that he called the
Factory, and that soon became the hub of a large entourage—hangers-on,
actors, aspiring artists. Here, particularly at night, Warhol would simply
wander about, or stand in a corner. People would gather around him, fight
for his attention, throw questions at him, and he would answer, in his non-
committal way. But no one could get close to him, physically or mentally;
he would not allow it. At the same time, if he walked by you without giv-
ing you his usual "Oh, hi," you were devastated. He hadn't noticed you;
perhaps you were on the way out.
Increasingly interested in filmmaking, Warhol cast his friends in his
movies. In effect he was offering them a kind of instant celebrity (their
"fifteen minutes of fame"—the phrase is Warhol's). Soon people were
competing for roles. He groomed women in particular for stardom: Edie
Sedgwick, Viva, Nico. Just being around him offered a kind of celebrity by
association. The Factory became the place to be seen, and stars like Judy
Garland and Tennessee Williams would go to parties there, rubbing elbows
with Sedgwick, Viva, and the bohemian lower echelons whom Warhol had
befriended. People began sending limos to bring him to parties of their
own; his presence alone was enough to turn a social evening into a scene—
even though he would pass through in near silence, keeping to himself and
leaving early.
In 1967, Warhol was asked to lecture at various colleges. He hated to
talk, particularly about his own art; "The less something has to say," he felt,
"the more perfect it is." But the money was good and Warhol always found
it hard to say no. His solution was simple: he asked an actor, Allen
Midgette, to impersonate him. Midgette was dark-haired, tan, part Chero-
kee Indian. He did not resemble Warhol in the least. But Warhol and
friends covered his face with powder, sprayed his brown hair silver, gave
him dark glasses, and dressed him in Warhol's clothes. Since Midgette knew
nothing about art, his answers to students' questions tended to be as short
and enigmatic as Warhol's own. The impersonation worked. Warhol may
have been an icon, but no one really knew him, and since he often wore
dark glasses, even his face was unfamiliar in any detail. The lecture audi-
ences were far enough away to be teased by the thought of his presence,
and no one got close enough to catch the deception. He remained elusive.
* * *looking round in every
direction. . . . He looked
behind him, and when no
one appeared, cried again:
"Why are you avoiding
me?" But all he heard
were his own words echoed
back. Still he persisted,
deceived by what he took to
be another's voice, and
said, "Come here, and let
us meet!" Echo answered:
"Let us meet!" Never
again would she reply more
willingly to any sound. To
make good her words she
came out of the wood and
made to throw her arms
round the neck she loved:
but he fled from her, crying
as he did so, "Away with
these embraces! I would die
before I would have you
touch me!" . . . Thus
scorned, she concealed
herself in the woods, hiding
her shamed face in the
shelter of the leaves, and
ever since that day she
dwells in lonely caves. Yet
still her love remained
firmly rooted in her heart,
and was increased by the
pain of having been
rejected. . . . • Narcissus
had played with her
affections, treating her as he
had previously treated other
spirits of the waters and
the woods, and his male
admirers too. Then one of
those he had scorned raised
up his hands to heaven
and prayed: "May he
himself fall in love with
another, as we have done
with him! May he too be
unable to gain his loved
one!" Nemesis heard and
granted his righteous
prayer. ...• Narcissus,
wearied with hunting in
the heat of the day, lay
down here [by a clear
pool]: for he was attracted
by the beauty of the place,
and by the spring. While
he sought to quench his
thirst, another thirst grew
