Effect a Regression • 341
velop a keen hatred of his students. Mut was in his late fifties, and had
worked at the same school for many years. He taught Greek and Latin and
was a distinguished classical scholar. He had always felt a need to impose
discipline, but now it was getting ugly: the students were simply not inter-
ested in Homer anymore. They listened to bad music and only liked mod-
ern literature. Although they were rebellious, Mut considered them soft
and undisciplined. He wanted to teach them a lesson and make their lives
miserable; his usual way of dealing with their bouts of rowdiness was sheer
bullying, and most often it worked.
One day a student Mut loathed—a haughty, well-dressed young man
named Lohmann—stood up in class and said, "I can't go on working in this
room, Professor. There is such a smell of mud." Mud was the boys' nick-
name for Professor Mut. The professor seized Lohmann by the arm,
twisted it hard, then banished him from the room. He later noticed that
Lohmann had left his exercise book behind, and thumbing through it he
saw a paragraph about an actress named Rosa Fröhlich. A plot hatched in
Mut's mind: he would catch Lohmann cavorting with this actress, no doubt
a woman of ill repute, and would get the boy kicked out of school.
First he had to find out where she performed. He searched high and
low, finally finding her name up outside a club called the Blue Angel.
He went in. It was a smoke-filled place, full of the working-class types
he looked down on. Rosa was onstage. She was singing a song; the way she
looked everyone in the audience in the eye was rather brazen, but for some
reason Mut found this disarming. He relaxed a little, had some wine. After
her performance he made his way to her dressing room, determined to grill
her about Lohmann. Once there he felt strangely uncomfortable, but he
gathered up his courage, accused her of leading schoolboys astray, and
threatened to get the police to close the place down. Rosa, however, was
not intimidated. She turned all of Mut's sentences around: perhaps he was
the one leading boys astray. Her tone was cajoling and teasing. Yes,
Lohmann had bought her flowers and champagne—so what? No one had
ever talked to Mut this way before; his authoritative tone usually made peo-
ple give way. He should have felt offended: she was low class and a woman,
and he was a schoolmaster, but she was talking to him as if they were
equals. Instead, however, he neither got angry nor left—something com-
pelled him to stay.
Now she was silent. She picked up a stocking and started to darn it, ig-
noring him; his eyes followed her every move, particularly the way she
rubbed her bare knee. Finally he brought up Lohmann again, and the po-
lice. "You've no idea what this life's like," she said. "Everyone who comes
here thinks he's the only pebble on the beach. If you don't give them what
they want they threaten you with the police!" "I certainly regret having
hurt a lady's feelings," he replied sheepishly. As she got up from her chair,
their knees rubbed, and he felt a shiver up his spine. Now she was nice to
him again, and poured him some more wine. She invited him to come
back, then left abruptly to perform another number.
342 • The Art of Seduction
The next day he kept thinking about her words, her looks. Thinking
about her while he was teaching gave him a kind of naughty thrill. That
night he went back to the club, still determined to catch Lohmann in the
act, and once again found himself in Rosa's dressing room, drinking wine
and becoming strangely passive. She asked him to help her get dressed; that
seemed quite an honor and he obliged her. Helping her with her corset and
her makeup, he forgot about Lohmann. He felt he was being initiated into
some new world. She pinched his cheeks and stroked his chin, and occa-
sionally let him glimpse her bare leg as she rolled up a stocking.
Now Professor Mut showed up night after night, helping her dress,
watching her perform, all with a strange kind of pride. He was there so
often that Lohmann and his friends no longer showed up. He had taken
their place—he was the one to bring her flowers, pay for her champagne,
the one to serve her. Yes, an old man like himself had bested the youthful
Lohmann, who thought himself so suave! He liked it when she stroked his
chin, complimented him for doing things right, but he felt even more ex-
cited when she rebuked him, throwing a powder puff in his face or pushing
him off a chair. It meant she liked him. And so, gradually, he began to pay
for all her caprices. It cost him a pretty penny but kept her away from other
men. Eventually he proposed to her. They married, and scandal ensued: he
lost his job, and soon all his money; finally he landed in prison. To the very
end, however, he could never get angry with Rosa. Instead he felt guilty:
he had never done enough for her.
Interpretation. Professor Mut and Rosa Fröhlich are characters in the
novel The Blue Angel, written by Heinrich Mann in 1905, and later made
into a film starring Marlene Dietrich. Rosa's seduction of Mut follows the
classic oedipal regression pattern. First, the woman treats the man the way a
mother would treat a little boy. She scolds him, but the scolding is not
threatening; it is tender, and has a teasing edge. Like a mother, she knows
she is dealing with someone weak, who cannot help his naughty behavior.
She mixes plenty of praise and approval in with her taunts. Once the man
begins to regress, she adds physical excitement—some bodily contact to ex-
cite him, subtle sexual overtones. As a reward for his regression, the man may
get the thrill of finally sleeping with his mother. But there is always an ele-
ment of competition, which the mother figure must heighten. The man
gets to possess her all on his own, something he could not do with father in
the way, but he first has to win her away from others.
The key to this kind of regression is to see and treat your targets as chil-
dren. Nothing about them intimidates you, no matter how much authority
or social standing they have. Your manner makes it clear that you feel you
are the stronger party. To accomplish this it may be helpful to imagine or
visualize them as the children they once were; suddenly, powerful people
do not seem so powerful and threatening when you regress them in your
imagination. Keep in mind that certain types are more vulnerable to an
