260 • The Art of Seduction
Sometimes the most pleasant thing to hear is the promise of something
wonderful, a vague but rosy future that is just around the corner. President
Franklin Delano Roosevelt, in his public speeches, talked little about spe-
cific programs for dealing with the Depression; instead he used rousing
rhetoric to paint a picture of America's glorious future. In the various leg-
ends of Don Juan, the great seducer would immediately focus women's at-
tention on the future, a fantastic world to which he promised to whisk
them off. Tailor your sweet words to your targets' particular problems and
fantasies. Promise something realizable, something possible, but do not
make it too specific; you are inviting them to dream. If they are mired in
dull routine, talk of adventure, preferably with you. Do not discuss how it
will be accomplished; speak as if it magically already existed, somewhere in
the future. Lift people's thoughts into the clouds and they will relax, their
defenses will come down, and it will be that much easier to maneuver and
lead them astray. Your words become a kind of elevating drug.
The most anti-seductive form of language is argument. How many
silent enemies do we create by arguing? There is a superior way to get peo-
ple to listen and be persuaded: humor and a light touch. The nineteenth-
century English politician Benjamin Disraeli was a master at this game. In
Parliament, to fail to reply to an accusation or slanderous comment was a
deadly mistake: silence meant the accuser was right. Yet to respond angrily,
to get into an argument, was to look ugly and defensive. Disraeli used a dif-
ferent tactic: he stayed calm. When the time came to reply to an attack, he
would slowly make his way to the speaker's table, pause, then utter a hu-
morous or sarcastic retort. Everyone would laugh. Now that he had
warmed people up, he would proceed to refute his enemy, still mixing in
amusing comments; or perhaps he would simply move on to another sub-
ject, as if he were above it all. His humor took out the sting of any attack
on him. Laughter and applause have a domino effect: once your listeners
have laughed, they are more likely to laugh again. In this lighthearted mood
they are also more apt to listen. A subtle touch and a bit of irony give you
room to persuade them, move them to your side, mock your enemies. That
is the seductive form of argument.
Shortly after the murder of Julius Caesar, the head of the band of con-
spirators who had killed him, Brutus, addressed an angry mob. He tried to
reason with the crowd, explaining that he had wanted to save the Roman
Republic from dictatorship. The people were momentarily convinced—
yes, Brutus seemed a decent man. Then Mark Antony took the stage, and
he in turn delivered a eulogy for Caesar. He seemed overwhelmed with
emotion. He talked of his love for Caesar, and of Caesar's love for the
Roman people. He mentioned Caesar's will; the crowd clamored to hear it,
but Antony said no, for if he read it they would know how deeply Caesar
had loved them, and how dastardly this murder was. The crowd again in-
sisted he read the will; instead he held up Caesar's bloodstained cloak, not-
ing its rents and tears. This was where Brutus had stabbed the great general,
he said; Cassius had stabbed him here. Then finally he read the will, whichdrops. \ Kind souls, what
weep you when you but
behold \ Our Caesar's
vesture wounded? Look
you here! \ Here is himself,
marred as you see until
traitors.
—WILLIAM SHAKESPEARE,
JULIUS CAESAR
Use the Demonic Power of Words to Sow Confusion • 261
told how much wealth Caesar had left to the Roman people. This was the
coup de grace—the crowd turned against the conspirators and went off to
lynch them.
Antony was a clever man, who knew how to stir a crowd. According to
the Greek historian Plutarch, "When he saw that his oratory had cast a spell
over the people and that they were deeply stirred by his words, he began to
introduce into his praises [of Caesar] a note of pity and of indignation at
Caesar's fate." Seductive language aims at people's emotions, for emotional
people are easier to deceive. Antony used various devices to stir the crowd:
a tremor in his voice, a distraught and then an angry tone. An emotional
voice has an immediate, contagious effect on the listener. Antony also
teased the crowd with the will, holding off the reading of it to the end,
knowing it would push people over the edge. Holding up the cloak, he
made his imagery visceral.
Perhaps you are not trying to whip a crowd into a frenzy; you just want
to bring people over to your side. Choose your strategy and words carefully.
You might think it is better to reason with people, explain your ideas. But
it is hard for an audience to decide whether an argument is reasonable as
they listen to you talk. They have to concentrate and listen closely, which
requires great effort. People are easily distracted by other stimuli, and if
they miss a part of your argument, they will feel confused, intellectually in-
ferior, and vaguely insecure. It is more persuasive to appeal to people's
hearts than their heads. Everyone shares emotions, and no one feels inferior
to a speaker who stirs up their feelings. The crowd bonds together, every-
one contagiously experiencing the same emotions. Antony talked of Cae-
sar as if he and the listeners were experiencing the murder from Caesar's
point of view. What could be more provocative? Use such changes of per-
spective to make your listeners feel what you are saying. Orchestrate your
effects. It is more effective to move from one emotion to another than to
just hit one note. The contrast between Antony's affection for Caesar and
his indignation at the murderers was much more powerful than if he had
stayed with one feeling or the other.
The emotions you are trying to arouse should be strong ones. Do not
speak of friendship and disagreement; speak of love and hate. And it is cru-
cial to try to feel something of the emotions you are trying to elicit. You
will be more believable that way. This should not be difficult: imagine the
reasons for loving or hating before you speak. If necessary, think of some-
thing from your past that fills you with rage. Emotions are contagious; it is
easier to make someone cry if you are crying yourself. Make your voice an
instrument, and train it to communicate emotion. Learn to seem sincere.
Napoleon studied the greatest actors of his time, and when he was alone he
would practice putting emotion into his voice.
The goal of seductive speech is often to create a kind of hypnosis: you
are distracting people, lowering their defenses, making them more vulnera-
ble to suggestion. Learn the hypnotist's lessons of repetition and affirma-
tion, key elements in putting a subject to sleep. Repetition involves using
