Choose the Right Victim • 173
Be careful with appearances. The person who seems volcanically pas-
sionate is often hiding insecurity and self-involvement. This was what most
men failed to perceive in the nineteenth-century courtesan Lola Montez.
She seemed so dramatic, so exciting. In fact, she was a troubled, self-
obsessed woman, but by the time men discovered this it was too late—they
had become involved with her and could not extricate themselves without
months of drama and torture. People who are outwardly distant or shy are
often better targets than extroverts. They are dying to be drawn out, and
still waters run deep.
People with a lot of time on their hands are extremely susceptible to se-
duction. They have mental space for you to fill. Tullia d'Aragona, the infa-
mous sixteenth-century Italian courtesan, preferred young men as her
victims; besides the physical reason for such a preference, they were more
idle than working men with careers, and therefore more defenseless against
an ingenious seductress. On the other hand, you should generally avoid
people who are preoccupied with business or work—seduction demands
attention, and busy people have too little space in their minds for you to
occupy.
According to Freud, seduction begins early in life, in our relationship
with our parents. They seduce us physically, both with bodily contact and
by satisfying desires such as hunger, and we in turn try to seduce them into
paying us attention. We are creatures by nature vulnerable to seduction
throughout our lives. We all want to be seduced; we yearn to be drawn out
of ourselves, out of our routines and into the drama of eros. And what
draws us more than anything is the feeling that someone has something we
don't, a quality we desire. Your perfect victims are often people who think
you have something they don't, and who will be enchanted to have it pro-
vided for them. Such victims may have a temperament quite the opposite
of yours, and this difference will create an exciting tension.
When Jiang Qing, later known as Madame Mao, first met Mao Tse-
tung in 1937 in his mountain retreat in western China, she could sense
how desperate he was for a bit of color and spice in his life: all the camp's
women dressed like the men, and abjured any feminine finery. Jiang had
been an actress in Shanghai, and was anything but austere. She supplied
what he lacked, and she also gave him the added thrill of being able to edu-
cate her in communism, appealing to his Pygmalion complex—the desire
to dominate, control, and remake a person. In fact it was Jiang Qing who
controlled her future husband.
The greatest lack of all is excitement and adventure, which is precisely
what seduction offers. In 1964, the Chinese actor Shi Pei Pu, a man who
had gained fame as a female impersonator, met Bernard Bouriscout, a young
diplomat assigned to the French embassy in China. Bouriscout had come
to China looking for adventure, and was disappointed to have little contact
with Chinese people. Pretending to be a woman who, when still a child,
had been forced to live as a boy—supposedly the family already had too
many daughters—Shi Pei Pu used the young Frenchman's boredom andor emotional side of his
nature, rises to the surface
and demands its rights.
When such a period occurs,
all that which has formerly
seemed important loses its
significance. The will-of-
the-wisp of illusion leads
the man hither and thither,
taking him on strange and
complicated deviations from
his former path in life.
Ming Huang, the "Bright
Emperor" of the T'ang
dynasty, was an example
of the profound truth of
this theory. From the
moment he saw Yang
Kuei-fei bathing in the
lake near his palace in the
Li mountains, he was
destined to sit at her feet,
learning from her the
emotional mysteries of
what the Chinese call Yin.
—ELOISE TALCOTT HIBBERT,
EMBROIDERED GAUZE:
PORTRAITS OF FAMOUS
CHINESE LADIES
174 • The Art of Seduction
discontent to manipulate him. Inventing a story of the deceptions he had
had to go through, he slowly drew Bouriscout into an affair that would last
many years. (Bouriscout had had previous homosexual encounters, but con-
sidered himself heterosexual.) Eventually the diplomat was led into spying
for the Chinese. All the while, he believed Shi Pei Pu was a woman—his
yearning for adventure had made him that vulnerable. Repressed types are
perfect victims for a deep seduction.
People who repress the appetite for pleasure make ripe victims, particu-
larly later in their lives. The eighth-century Chinese Emperor Ming Huang
spent much of his reign trying to rid his court of its costly addiction to lux-
uries, and was himself a model of austerity and virtue. But the moment he
saw the concubine Yang Kuei-fei bathing in a palace lake, everything
changed. The most charming woman in the realm, she was the mistress of
his son. Exerting his power, the emperor won her away—only to become
her abject slave.
The choice of the right victim is equally important in politics. Mass se-
ducers such as Napoleon or John F. Kennedy offer their public just what it
lacks. When Napoleon came to power, the French people's sense of pride
was beaten down by the bloody aftermath of the French Revolution. He
offered them glory and conquest. Kennedy recognized that Americans
were bored with the stultifying comfort of the Eisenhower years; he gave
them adventure and risk. More important, he tailored his appeal to the
group most vulnerable to it: the younger generation. Successful politicians
know that not everyone will be susceptible to their charm, but if they can
find a group of believers with a need to be filled, they have supporters who
will stand by them no matter what.
Symbol:
Big Game. Lions are dangerous—to hunt
them is to know the thrill of risk. Leopards are clever
and swift, offering the excitement of a difficult chase. Never
rush into the hunt. Know your prey and choose it carefully. Do
not waste time with small game—the rabbits that back into snares,
the mink that walk into a scented trap. Challenge is pleasure.
