Appendix B: Soft Seduction: How to Sell Anything to the Masses • 445
or movement—should actually be your real message. The audience may
focus superficially on the content or moral you are preaching, but they are
really absorbing the visuals, which get under their skin and stay there longer
than any words or preachy pronouncements. Your visuals should have a
hypnotic effect. They should make people feel happy or sad, depending on
what you want to accomplish. And the more they are distracted by visual
cues, the harder it will be for them to think straight or see through your
manipulations.
Speak the target's language—be chummy. At all costs, avoid appearing
superior to your audience. Any hint of smugness, the use of complicated
words or ideas, quoting too many statistics—all that is fatal. Instead, make
yourself seem equal to your targets and on intimate terms with them. You
understand them, you share their spirit, their language. If people are cynical
about the manipulations of advertisers and politicians, exploit their cyni-
cism for your own purposes. Portray yourself as one of the folk, warts and
all. Show that you share your audience's skepticism by revealing the tricks
of the trade. Make your publicity as down-home and minimal as possible,
so that your competitors look sophisticated and snobby in comparison.
Your selective honesty and strategic weakness will get people to trust you.
You are the audience's friend, an intimate. Enter their spirit and they will
relax and listen to you.
Start a chain reaction—everyone is doing it. People who seem to be de-
sired by others are immediately more seductive to their targets. Apply this
to the soft seduction. You need to act as if you have already excited crowds
of people; your behavior will become a self-fulfilling prophecy. Seem to be
in the vanguard of a trend or life-style and the public will lap you up for
fear of being left behind. Spread your image, with a logo, slogans, posters,
so that it appears everywhere. Announce your message as a trend and it will
become one. The goal is to create a kind of viral effect in which more and
more people become infected with the desire to have whatever you are of-
fering. This is the easiest and most seductive way to sell.
Tell people who they are. It is always unwise to engage an individual or
the public in any kind of argument. They will resist you. Instead of trying
to change people's ideas, try to change their identity, their perception of
reality, and you will have far more control of them in the long run. Tell
them who they are, create an image, an identity that they will want to as-
sume. Make them dissatisfied with their current status. Making them un-
happy with themselves gives you room to suggest a new life-style, a new
identity. Only by listening to you can they find out who they are. At the
same time, you want to change their perception of the world outside them
446 • Appendix B: Soft Seduction: How to Sell Anything to the Masses
by controlling what they look at. Use as many media as possible to create a
kind of total environment for their perceptions. Your image should be seen
not as an advertisement but as part of the atmosphere.
Some Soft Seductions
1. Andrew Jackson was a true American hero. In 1814, in the Battle of
New Orleans, he led a ragtag band of American soldiers against a superior
English army and won. He also conquered Indians in Florida. Jackson's
army loved him for his rough-hewn ways: he fed on acorns when there was
nothing else to eat, he slept on a hard bed, he drank hard cider, just like his
men. Then, after he lost or was cheated out of the presidential election of
1824 (in fact he won the popular vote, but so narrowly that the election
was thrown into the House of Representatives, which chose John Quincy
Adams, after much deal making), he retired to his farm in Tennessee, where
he lived the simple life, tilling the soil, reading the Bible, staying far from
the corruptions of Washington. Where Adams had gone to Harvard, played
billiards, drunk soda water, and relished European finery, Jackson, like
many Americans of the time, had been raised in a log cabin. He was an un-
educated man, a man of the earth.
This, at any rate, was what Americans read in their newspapers in the
months after the controversial 1824 election. Spurred on by these articles,
people in taverns and halls across the country began talking of how the war
hero Andrew Jackson had been wronged, how an insidious aristocratic elite
was conspiring to take over the country. So when Jackson declared that he
would run again against Adams in the presidential election of 1828—but
this time as the leader of a new organization, the Democratic Party—the
public was thrilled. Jackson was the first major political figure to have a
nickname, Old Hickory, and soon Hickory clubs were sprouting up in
America's towns and cities. Their meetings resembled spiritual revivals. The
hot-button issues of the day were discussed (tariffs, the abolition of slav-
ery), and club members felt certain that Jackson was on their side. It was
hard to know for sure—he was a little vague on the issues—but this elec-
tion was about something larger than issues: it was about restoring democ-
racy and restoring basic American values to the White House.
Soon the Hickory clubs were sponsoring events like town barbecues,
the planting of hickory trees, dances around a hickory pole. They orga-
nized lavish public feasts, always including large quantities of liquor. In the
cities there were parades, and these were stirring events. They often took
place at night so that urbanites would witness a procession of Jackson sup-
porters holding torches. Others would carry colorful banners with portraits
of Jackson or caricatures of Adams and slogans ridiculing his decadent
ways. And everywhere there was hickory—hickory sticks, hickory brooms,
hickory canes, hickory leaves in people's hats. Men on horseback would
