328 • The Art of Seduction
case, had decided to leave his cavalry division and form units of his own.
(He was an artist, after all, and could not be subjected to army discipline.)
Calling himself Commandante, he overcame his habitual seasickness and di-
rected a series of daring raids, leading groups of motorboats in the middle
of the night into Austrian harbors and firing torpedoes at anchored ships.
He also learned how to fly, and began to lead dangerous sorties. In August
of 1915, he flew over the city of Trieste, then in enemy hands, and dropped
Italian flags and thousands of pamphlets containing a message of hope, writ-
ten in his inimitable style: "The end of your martyrdom is at hand! The
dawn of your joy is imminent. From the heights of heaven, on the wings of
Italy, I throw you this pledge, this message from my heart." He flew at alti-
tudes unheard of at the time, and through thick enemy fire. The Austrians
put a price on his head.
On a mission in 1916, D'Annunzio fell against his machine gun, per-
manently injuring one eye and seriously damaging the other. Told his fly-
ing days were over, he convalesced in his home in Venice. At the time, the
most beautiful and fashionable woman in Italy was generally considered to
be the Countess Morosini, former mistress of the German Kaiser. Her
palace was on the Grand Canal, opposite the home of D'Annunzio. Now
she found herself besieged by letters and poems from the writer-soldier,
mixing details of his flying exploits with declarations of his love. In the
middle of air raids on Venice, he would cross the canal, barely able to see
out of one eye, to deliver his latest poem. D'Annunzio was much beneath
Morosini's station, a mere writer, but his willingness to brave anything on
her behalf won her over. The fact that his reckless behavior could get him
killed any day only hastened the seduction.
D'Annunzio ignored the doctors' advice and returned to flying, leading
even more daring raids than before. By the end of the war, he was Italy's
most decorated hero. Now, wherever in the nation he appeared, the public
filled the piazzas to hear his speeches. After the war, he led a march on
Fiume, on the Adriatic coast. In the negotiations to settle the war, Italians
believed they should have been awarded this city, but the Allies had not
agreed. D'Annunzio's forces took over the city and the poet became a
leader, ruling Fiume for more than a year as an autonomous republic. By
then, everyone had forgotten about his less-than-glorious past as a decadent
writer. Now he could do no wrong.
Interpretation. The appeal of seduction is that of being separated from our
normal routines, experiencing the thrill of the unknown. Death is the ulti-
mate unknown. In periods of chaos, confusion, and death—the plagues
that swept Europe in the Middle Ages, the Terror of the French Revolu-
tion, the air raids on London during World War II—people often let go of
their usual caution and do things they never would otherwise. They expe-
rience a kind of delirium. There is something immensely seductive aboutyet was his love so great
and his hope so strong,
sure as he felt of the
ceaseless continuance of the
love he had thus painfully
won, that he preserved his
patience and rose from
beside her without having
done anything contrary to
her expressed wish. • The
lady was, I think, more
astonished than pleased by
such virtue; and giving no
heed to the honor, patience,
and faithfulness her lover
had shown in the keeping
of his oath, she forthwith
suspected that his love was
not so great as she had
thought, or else that he had
found her less pleasing
than he had expected. •
She therefore resolved,
before keeping her promise,
to make a further trial of
the love he bore her; and to
this end she begged him to
talk to a girl in her service,
who was younger than
herself and very beautiful,
bidding him make love
speeches to her, so that
those who saw him come so
often to the house might
think that it was for the
sake of this damsel and not
of herself • The young
lord, feeling sure that his
own love was returned in
equal measure, was wholly
obedient to her commands,
and for love of her
compelled himself to make
love to the girl; and she,
finding him so handsome
and well-spoken, believed
his lies more than other
truth, and loved him as
much as though she herself
were greatly loved by him.
• The mistress finding that
matters were thus well
advanced, albeit the young
lord did not cease to claim
her promise, granted him
permission to come and see
her at one hour after
midnight, saying that after
Prove Yourself • 329
danger, about heading into the unknown. Show that you have a reckless
streak and a daring nature, that you lack the usual fear of death, and you are
instantly fascinating to the bulk of humanity.
What you are proving in this instance is not how you feel toward an-
other person but something about yourself: you are willing to go out on a
limb. You are not just another talker and braggart. It is a recipe for instant
charisma. Any political figure—Churchill, de Gaulle, Kennedy—who has
proven himself on the battlefield has an unmatchable appeal. Many had
thought of D'Annunzio as a foppish womanizer; his experience in the war
gave him a heroic sheen, a Napoleonic aura. In fact he had always been an
effective seducer, but now he was even more devilishly appealing. You do
not necessarily have to risk death, but putting yourself in its vicinity will
give you a seductive charge. (It is often best to do this some way into the
seduction, making it come as a pleasant surprise.) You are willing to enter
the unknown. No one is more seductive than the person who has had a
brush with death. People will be drawn to you; perhaps they are hoping
that some of your adventurous spirit will rub off on them.
4. According to one version of the Arthurian legend, the great knight Sir
Lancelot once caught a glimpse of Queen Guinevere, King Arthur's wife,
and that glimpse was enough—he fell madly in love. And so when word
reached him that Queen Guinevere had been kidnapped by an evil knight,
Lancelot did not hesitate—he forgot his other chivalrous tasks and hurried
in pursuit. His horse collapsed from the chase, so he continued on foot. Fi-
nally it seemed that he was close, but he was exhausted and could go no
farther. A horse-driven cart passed by; the cart was filled with loathsome-
looking men shackled together. In those days it was the tradition to place
criminals—murderers, traitors, cowards, thieves—in such a cart, which
then passed through every street in town so that people could see it. Once
you had ridden in the cart, you lost all feudal rights for the rest of your life.
The cart was such a dreadful symbol that seeing an empty one made you
shiver and give the sign of the cross. Even so, Sir Lancelot accosted the
cart's driver, a dwarf: "In the name of God, tell me if you've seen my lady
the queen pass by this way?" "If you want to get into this cart I'm driving,"
said the dwarf, "by tomorrow you'll know what has become of the queen."
Then he drove the cart onward. Lancelot hesitated for but two of the
horse's steps, then ran after it and climbed in.
Wherever the cart went, townspeople heckled it. They were most curi-
ous about the knight among the passengers. What was his crime? How will
he be put to death—flayed? Drowned? Burned upon a fire of thorns? Fi-
nally the dwarf let him get out, without a word as to the whereabouts of
the queen. To make matters worse, no one now would go near or talk to
Lancelot, for he had been in the cart. He kept on chasing the queen, and all
along the way he was cursed at, spat upon, challenged by other knights. Hehaving so fully tested the
love and obedience he had
shown towards her, it was
but just that he should be
rewarded for his long
patience. Of the lover's joy
on hearing this you need
have no doubt, and he
failed not to arrive at the
appointed time. • But the
lady, still wishing to try the
strength of his love, had
said to her beautiful
damsel—"I am well aware
of the love a certain
nobleman bears to you,
and I think you are no less
in love with him; and I feel
so much pity for you both,
that I have resolved to
afford you time and place
that you may converse
together at your ease." •
The damsel was so
enchanted that she could
not conceal her longings,
but answered that she
would not fail to be
present. • In obedience,
therefore, to her mistress's
counsel and command, she
undressed herself and lay
down on a handsome bed,
in a room the door of
which the lady left half
open, whilst within she set
a light so that the maiden's
beauty might be clearly
seen. Then she herself
pretended to go away, but
hid herself near to the bed
so carefully that she could
not be seen. • Her poor
lover, thinking to find her
according to her promise,
failed not to enter the room
as softly as he could, at the
appointed hour; and after
he had shut the door and
put off his garments and
fur shoes, he got into the
bed, where he looked to
find what he desired. But
no sooner did he put out
his arms to embrace her
whom he believed to be his
mistress, than the poor girl,
believing him entirely her
