64 • The Art of Seduction
afraid of," came a man's voice, and continued with a poem of his own:
"Late in the night we enjoy a misty moon. There is nothing misty about
the bond between us." Without another word, the man pulled the princess
to him and picked her up, carrying her into a gallery outside her room,
sliding the door closed behind him. She was terrified, and tried to call for
help. In the darkness she heard him say, a little louder now, "It will do you
no good. I am always allowed my way. Just be quiet, if you will, please."
Now the princess recognized the voice, and the scent: it was Genji, the
young son of the late emperor's concubine, whose robes bore a distinctive
perfume. This calmed her somewhat, since the man was someone she
knew, but on the other hand she also knew of his reputation: Genji was the
court's most incorrigible seducer, a man who stopped at nothing. He was
drunk, it was near dawn, and the watchmen would soon be on their
rounds; she did not want to be discovered with him. But then she began to
make out the outlines of his face—so pretty, his look so sincere, without a
trace of malice. Then came more poems, recited in that charming voice,
the words so insinuating. The images he conjured filled her mind, and dis-
tracted her from his hands. She could not resist him.
As the light began to rise, Genji got to his feet. He said a few tender
words, they exchanged fans, and then he quickly left. The serving women
were coming through the emperor's rooms by now, and when they saw
Genji scurrying away, the perfume of his robes lingering after him, they
smiled, knowing he was up to his usual tricks; but they never imagined he
would dare approach the sister of the emperor's wife.
In the days that followed, Oborozukiyo could only think of Genji. She
knew he had other mistresses, but when she tried to put him out of her
mind, a letter from him would arrive, and she would be back to square one.
In truth, she had started the correspondence, haunted by his midnight visit.
She had to see him again. Despite the risk of discovery, and the fact that
her sister Kokiden, the emperor's wife, hated Genji, she arranged for fur-
ther trysts in her apartment. But one night an envious courtier found them
together. Word reached Kokiden, who naturally was furious. She de-
manded that Genji be banished from court and the emperor had no choice
but to agree.
Genji went far away, and things settled down. Then the emperor died
and his son took over. A kind of emptiness had come to the court: the
dozens of women whom Genji had seduced could not endure his absence,
and flooded him with letters. Even women who had never known him in-
timately would weep over any relic he had left behind—a robe, for in-
stance, in which his scent still lingered. And the young emperor missed his
jocular presence. And the princesses missed the music he had played on the
koto. And Oborozukiyo pined for his midnight visits. Finally even Kokiden
broke down, realizing that she could not resist him. So Genji was sum-
moned back to the court. And not only was he forgiven, he was given a
hero's welcome; the young emperor himself greeted the scoundrel with
tears in his eyes.
The Natural • 65
The story of Genji's life is told in the eleventh-century novel The Tale of
Genji, written by Murasaki Shikibu, a woman of the Heian court. The
character was most likely based on a real-life man, Fujiwara no Korechika.
Indeed another book of the period, The Pillow Book of Sei Shonagon, de-
scribes an encounter between the female author and Korechika, and reveals
his incredible charm and his almost hypnotic effect on women. Genji is a
Natural, an undefensive lover, a man who has a lifelong obsession with
women but whose appreciation of and affection for them makes him irre-
sistible. As he says to Oborozukiyo in the novel, "I am always allowed my
way." This self-belief is half of Genji's charm. Resistance does not make
him defensive; he retreats gracefully, reciting a little poetry, and as he leaves,
the perfume of his robes trailing behind him, his victim wonders why she
has been so afraid, and what she is missing by spurning him, and she finds a
way to let him know that the next time things will be different. Genji takes
nothing seriously or personally, and at the age of forty, an age at which
most men of the eleventh century were already looking old and worn, he
still seems like a boy. His seductive powers never leave him.
Human beings are immensely suggestible; their moods will easily spread
to the people around them. In fact seduction depends on mimesis, on the
conscious creation of a mood or feeling that is then reproduced by the
other person. But hesitation and awkwardness are also contagious, and
are deadly to seduction. If in a key moment you seem indecisive or self-
conscious, the other person will sense that you are thinking of yourself, in-
stead of being overwhelmed by his or her charms. The spell will be broken.
As an undefensive lover, though, you produce the opposite effect: your vic-
tim might be hesitant or worried, but confronted with someone so sure and
natural, he or she will be caught up in the mood. Like dancing with some-
one you lead effortlessly across the dance floor, it is a skill you can learn. It
is a matter of rooting out the fear and awkwardness that have built up in
you over the years, of becoming more graceful with your approach, less de-
fensive when others seem to resist. Often people's resistance is a way of
testing you, and if you show any awkwardness or hesitation, you not only
will fail the test, but you will risk infecting them with your doubts.
Symbol: The
Lamb. So soft and endearing. At
two days old the lamb can gambol gracefully;
within a week it is playing "Follow the Leader."
Its weakness is part of its charm. The Lamb is pure inno-
cence, so innocent we want to possess it, even devour it.
