356 • The Art of Seduction
In Junichiro Tanazaki's 1928 novel Quicksand, Sonoko Kakiuchi, the
wife of a respectable lawyer, is bored and decides to take art classes to wile
away the time. There, she finds herself fascinated with a fellow female stu-
dent, the beautiful Mitsuko, who befriends her, then seduces her. Kakiuchi
is forced to tell endless lies to her husband about her involvement with
Mitsuko and their frequent trysts. Mitsuko slowly involves her in all kinds
of nefarious activities, including a love triangle with a bizarre young man.
Each time Kakiuchi is made to explore some forbidden pleasure, Mitsuko
challenges her to go further and further. Kakiuchi hesitates, feels remorse—
she knows she is in the clutches of a devilish young seductress who has
played on her boredom to lead her astray. But in the end, she cannot help
following Mitsuko's lead—each transgressive act makes her want more.
Once your targets are drawn by the lure of the forbidden, dare them to
match you in transgressive behavior. Any kind of challenge is seductive.
Take it slowly heightening the challenge only after they show signs of
yielding to you. Once they are under your spell, they may not even notice
how far out on a limb you have taken them.
The great eighteenth-century rake Duc de Richelieu had a prediliction
for young girls and he would often heighten the seduction by enveloping
them in transgressive behavior, to which the young are particularly suscep-
tible. For instance, he would find a way into the young girl's house and lure
her into her bed; the parents would be just down the hall, adding the
proper spice. Sometimes he would act as if they were about to be discov-
ered, the momentary fright sharpening the overall thrill. In all cases, he
would try to turn the young girl against her parents, ridiculing their reli-
gious zeal or prudery or pious behavior. The duke's stategy was to attack
the values that his targets held dearest—precisely the values that represent a
limit. In a young person, family ties, religious ties, and the like are useful to
the seducer; young people barely need a reason to rebel against them. The
strategy, though, can be applied to a person of any age: for every deeply
held value there is a shadow side, a doubt, a desire to explore what those
values forbid.
In Renaissance Italy, a prostitute would dress as a lady and go to
church. Nothing was more exciting to a man than to exchange glances
with a woman whom he knew to be a whore as he was surrounded by his
wife, family, peers, and church officials. Every religion or value system
creates a dark side, the shadow realm of everything it prohibits. Tease your
targets, get them to flirt with whatever transgresses their family values,
which are often emotional yet superficial, since they are imposed from the
outside.
One of the most seductive men of the twentieth century, Rudolph
Valentino, was known as the Sex Menace. His appeal for women was
twofold: he could be tender and attentive, but he also hinted of cruelty. At
any moment he could become dangerously bold, perhaps even a little vio-
lent. The studios played up this double image as much as possible—when it
was reported that he had been abusive to his wife, for example, they ex-
Stir Up the Transgressive and Taboo • 357
ploited the story. A mix of the masculine and the feminine, the violent and
the tender, will always seem transgressive and appealing. Love is supposed
to be tender and delicate, but in fact it can release violent and destructive
emotions; and the possible violence of love, the way it breaks down our
normal reasonableness, is just what attracts us. Approach romance's violent
side by mixing a cruel streak into your tender attentions, particularly in the
latter stages of the seduction, when the target is in your clutches. The
courtesan Lola Montez was known to turn to violence, using a whip now
and then, and Lou Andreas-Salomé could be exceptionally cruel to her
men, playing coquettish games, turning alternately icy and demanding. Her
cruelty only kept her targets coming back for more. A masochistic involve-
ment can represent a great transgressive release.
The more illicit your seduction feels, the more powerful its effect. Give
your targets the feeling that they are committing a kind of crime, a deed
whose guilt they share with you. Create public moments in which the two
of you know something that those around you do not. It could be phrases
and looks that only you recognize, a secret. Byron's seductive appeal to
Lady Frances was connected to the nearness of her husband—in his com-
pany, for example, she had a love letter of Byron's hidden in her bosom. Jo-
hannes, the protagonist of Søren Kierkegaard's The Seducer's Diary, sent a
message to his target, the young Cordelia, in the middle of a dinner party
they were both attending; she could not reveal to the other guests that it
was from him, for then she would have to do some explaining. He might
also say something in public that would have a special meaning for her,
since it referred to something in one of his letters. All of this added spice to
the affair by giving it a feeling of a shared secret, even a guilty crime. It is
critical to play on tensions like these in public, creating a sense of complic-
ity and collusion against the world.
In the Tristan and Isolde legend, the famous lovers reach the heights of
bliss and exhilaration exactly because of the taboos they break. Isolde is en-
gaged to King Mark; she will soon be a married woman. Tristan is a loyal
subject and warrior in the service of King Mark, who is his father's age.
The whole affair has a feeling of stealing away the bride from the father.
Epitomizing the concept of love in the Western world, the legend has
had immense influence over the ages, and a crucial part of it is the idea
that without obstacles, without a feeling of transgression, love is weak and
flavorless.
People may be straining to remove restrictions on private behavior, to
make everything freer, in the world today, but that only makes seduction
more difficult and less exciting. Do what you can to reintroduce a feeling
of transgression and crime, even if it is only psychological or illusory.
There must be obstacles to overcome, social norms to flout, laws to break,
before the seduction can be consummated. It might seem that a permissive
society imposes few limits; find some. There will always be limits, sacred
cows, behavioral standards—endless ammunition for stirring up the trans-
gressive and taboo.
