392 • The Art of Seduction
Reversal
There are moments when creating space and absence will blow up in
your face. An absence at a critical moment in the seduction can make
the target lose interest in you. It also leaves too much to chance—while you
are away, they could find another person, who will distract their thoughts
from you. Cleopatra easily seduced Mark Antony, but after their first en-
counters, he returned to Rome. Cleopatra was mysterious and alluring, but
if she let too much time pass, he would forget her charms. So she let go of
her usual coquetry and came after him when he was on one of his military
campaigns. She knew that once he saw her, he would fall under her spell
again and pursue her.
Use absence only when you are sure of the target's affection, and never
let it go on too long. It is most effective later in the seduction. Also, never
create too much space—don't write too rarely, don't act too cold, don't
show too much interest in someone else. That is the strategy of mixing
pleasure with pain, detailed in chapter 20, and will create a dependent vic-
tim, or will even make him or her give up completely. Some people, too,
are inveterately passive: they are waiting for you to make the bold move,
and if you don't, they will think you are weak. The pleasure to be had from
such a victim is less than the pleasure you will get from someone more ac-
tive. But if you are involved with such a type, do what you need to if you
are to have your way, then end the affair and move on.
Use Physical Lures
Targets with active minds
are dangerous: if they see through your
manipulations, they may suddenly develop
doubts. Put their minds gently to rest, and waken
their dormant senses, by combining a nondefen-
sive attitude with a charged sexual presence.
While your cool, nonchalant air is calming
their minds and lowering their inhibitions,
your glances, voice, and bearing—oozing sex
and desire—are getting under their skin, agi-
tating their senses and raising their temperature.
Never force the physical; instead infect your targets
with heat, lure them into lust. Lead them into the
moment—an intensified present in which mo-
rality, judgment, and concern for the fu-
ture all melt away and the body
succumbs to pleasure.
