
Friend to Lover
Anne Marie Louis d'Orléans, the Duchess de Montpensier, known in
seventeenth-century France as La Grande Mademoiselle, had never
known love in her life. Her mother had died when she was young; her fa-
ther remarried and ignored her. She came from one of Europe's most illus-
trious families: her grandfather had been King Henry IV; the future King
Louis XIV was her cousin. When she was young, matches had been pro-
posed between her and the widowed king of Spain, the son of the Holy
Roman emperor, and even cousin Louis himself, among many others. But
all of these matches were designed for political purposes, or because of her
family's enormous wealth. No one bothered to woo her; she rarely even
met her suitors. To make matters worse, the Grande Mademoiselle was an
idealist who believed in the old-fashioned values of chivalry: courage, hon-
esty, virtue. She loathed the schemers whose motives in courting her were
dubious at best. Whom could she trust? One by one she found a reason to
spurn them. Spinsterhood seemed to be her fate.
In April of 1669, the Grande Mademoiselle, then forty-two, met one
of the strangest men in the court: the Marquis Antonin Peguilin, later
known as the Duke de Lauzun. A favorite of Louis XIV's, the thirty-six-
year-old Marquis was a brave soldier with an acid wit. He was also an in-
curable Don Juan. Although he was short, and certainly not handsome, his
impudent manners and his military exploits made him irresistible to
women. The Grande Mademoiselle had noticed him some years before, ad-
miring his elegance and boldness. But it was only this time, in 1669, that
she had a real conversation with him, if a short one, and although she knew
of his lady-killer reputation, she found him charming. A few days later they
ran into each other again; this time the conversation was longer, and
Lauzun proved more intelligent than she had imagined—they talked of the
playwright Corneille (her favorite), of heroism, and of other elevated top-
ics. Now their encounters became more frequent. They had become
friends. Anne Marie noted in her diary that her conversations with Lauzun,
when they occurred, were the highlight of her day; when he was not at
court, she felt his absence. Surely her encounters with him came frequently
enough that they could not be accidental on his part, but he always seemed
surprised to see her. At the same time, she recorded feeling uneasy—
strange emotions were stealing up on her, she did not know why.
179Many women adore the
elusive, \ Hate
overeagerness. So, play
hard to get, \ Stop boredom
developing. And don't let
your entreaties \ Sound too
confident of possession.
Insinuate sex \
Camouflaged as friendship.
I've seen ultrastubborn
creatures \ Fooled by this
gambit, the switch from
companion to stud.
—OVID, THEART OF LOVE,
TRANSLATED BY PETER GREEN
On the street, I do not stop
her, or I exchange a
greeting with her but never
come close, but always
strive for distance.
Presumably our repeated
encounters are clearly
noticeable to her;
presumably she does
perceive that on her
horizon a new planet has
loomed, which in its course
has encroached disturbingly
upon hers in a curiously
undisturbing way, but
she has no inkling of the
law underlying this
movement. . . . Before I
begin my attack, I must
