448 • Appendix B: Soft Seduction: How to Sell Anything to the Masses
by the opinion polls. The event in New Orleans—hardly nonpolitical, and
Louisiana was a swing state—bathed Jackson in an aura of patriotic, quasi-
religious grandeur.
Society has fractured into smaller and smaller units. Communities are
less cohesive; even individuals feel more inner conflict. To win an election
or to sell anything in large numbers, you have to paper over these differ-
ences somehow—you have to unify the masses. The only way to accom-
plish this is to create an inclusive image, one that attracts and excites people
on a basic, almost unconscious level. You are not talking about the truth, or
about reality; you are forging a myth.
Myths create identification. Build a myth about yourself and the com-
mon people will identify with your character, your plight, your aspirations,
just as you identify with theirs. This image should include your flaws, high-
light the fact that you are not the best orator, the most educated man, the
smoothest politician. Seeming human and down to earth disguises the
manufactured quality of your image. To sell this image you need to have
the proper vagueness. It is not that you avoid talk of issues and details—that
will make you seem insubstantial—but that all your talk of issues is framed
within the softer context of character, values, and vision. You want to
lower taxes, say, because it will help families—and you are a family person.
You must not only be inspiring but also entertaining—that is a popular,
friendly touch. This strategy will infuriate your opponents, who will try to
unmask you, reveal the truth behind the myth; but that will only make
them seem smug, overserious, defensive, and snobbish. That now becomes
part of their image, and it will help sink them.
2. On Easter Sunday, March 31, 1929, New York churchgoers began to
pour onto Fifth Avenue after the morning service for the annual Easter pa-
rade. The streets were blocked off, and as had been the custom for years,
people were wearing their finest outfits, women in particular showing off
the latest in spring fashions. But this year the promenaders on Fifth Avenue
noticed something else. Two young women were coming down the steps of
Saint Thomas's Church. At the bottom they reached into their purses, took
out cigarettes—Lucky Strikes—and lit up. Then they walked down the
avenue with their escorts, laughing and puffing away. A buzz went through
the crowd. Women had only recently begun smoking cigarettes, and it was
considered improper for a lady to be seen smoking in the street. Only a
certain kind of woman would do that. These two, however, were elegant
and fashionable. People watched them intently, and were further astounded
several minutes later when they reached the next church along the avenue.
Here two more young ladies—equally elegant and well bred—left the
church, approached the two holding cigarettes, and, as if suddenly inspired
to join them, pulled out Lucky Strikes of their own and asked for a light.
Now the four women were marching together down the avenue. They
were steadily joined by more, and soon ten young women were holding
Appendix B: Soft Seduction: How to Sell Anything to the Masses • 449
cigarettes in public, as if nothing were more natural. Photographers ap-
peared and took pictures of this novel sight. Usually at the Easter parade,
people would have been whispering about a new hat style or the new
spring color. This year everyone was talking about the daring young
women and their cigarettes. The next day, photographs and articles ap-
peared in the papers about them. A United Press dispatch read, "Just as
Miss Federica Freylinghusen, conspicuous in a tailored outfit of dark grey,
pushed her way thru the jam in front of St. Patrick's, Miss Bertha Hunt and
six colleagues struck another blow in behalf of the liberty of women.
Down Fifth Avenue they strolled, puffing at cigarettes. Miss Hunt issued
the following communique from the smoke-clouded battlefield: 'I hope
that we have started something and that these torches of freedom, with no
particular brand favored, will smash the discriminatory taboo on cigarettes
for women and that our sex will go on breaking down all discriminations.' "
The story was picked up by newspapers around the country, and soon
women in other cities began to light up in the streets. The controversy
raged for weeks, some papers decrying this new habit, others coming to the
women's defense. A few months later, though, public smoking by women
had become a socially acceptable practice. Few people bothered to protest
it anymore.
Interpretation. In January 1929, several New York debutantes received the
same telegram from a Miss Bertha Hunt: "In the interests of equality of the
sexes ... I and other young women will light another torch of freedom by
smoking cigarettes while strolling on Fifth Avenue Easter Sunday." The
debutantes who ended up participating met beforehand in the office where
Hunt worked as a secretary. They planned what churches to appear at, how
to link up with each other, all the details. Hunt handed out packs of Lucky
Strikes. Everything worked to perfection on the appointed day.
Little did the debutantes know, though, that the whole affair had been
masterminded by a man—Miss Hunt's boss, Edward Bernays, a public rela-
tions adviser to the American Tobacco Company, makers of Lucky Strike.
American Tobacco had been luring women into smoking with all kinds of
clever ads, but the consumption was limited by the fact that smoking in the
street was considered unladylike. The head of American Tobacco had asked
Bernays for his help and Mr. Bernays had obliged him by applying a tech-
nique that was to become his trademark: gain public attention by creating
an event that the media would cover as news. Orchestrate every detail but
make them seem spontaneous. As more people heard of this "event," it
would spark imitative behavior—in this case more women smoking in the
streets.
Bernays, a nephew of Sigmund Freud and perhaps the greatest public
relations genius of the twentieth century, understood a fundamental law of
any kind of sell. The moment the targets know you are after something—a
vote, a sale—they become resistant. But disguise your sales pitch as a news
