Pay Attention to Detail • 275
write on a valentine that he, "no longer in the sunset, but the twilight of
his existence, must encounter a life of anxiety and toil; but this, too, has its
romance, when he remembers that he labors for the most gracious of be-
ings!" Or he might send her a little box, with no inscription, but with a
heart transfixed by an arrow on one side and the word "Fideliter," or
"Faithfully," on the other. Victoria fell in love with Disraeli.
A gift has immense seductive power, but the object itself is less impor-
tant than the gesture, and the subtle thought or emotion that it communi-
cates. Perhaps the choice relates to something from the target's past, or
symbolizes something between you, or merely represents the lengths you
will go to to please. It was not the money Disraeli spent that impressed Vic-
toria, but the time he took to find the appropriate thing or make the ap-
propriate gesture. Expensive gifts have no sentiment attached; they may
temporarily excite their recipient but they are quickly forgotten, as a child
forgets a new toy. The object that reflects its giver's attentiveness has a lin-
gering sentimental power, which resurfaces every time its owner sees it.
In 1919, the Italian writer and war hero Gabriele D'Annunzio managed
to put together a band of followers and take over the town of Fiume, on
the Adriatic coast (now part of Slovenia). They established their own gov-
ernment there, which lasted for over a year. D'Annunzio initiated a series
of public spectacles that were to be immensely influential on politicians
elsewhere. He would address the public from a balcony overlooking the
town's main square, which would be full of colorful banners, flags, pagan
religious symbols, and, at night, torches. The speeches would be followed
by processions. Although D'Annunzio was not at all a Fascist, what he did
in Fiume crucially affected Benito Mussolini, who borrowed his Roman
salutes, his use of symbols, his mode of public address. Spectacles like these
have been used since then by governments everywhere, even democratic
ones. Their overall impression may be grand, but it is the orchestrated de-
tails that make them work—the number of senses they appeal to, the vari-
ety of emotions they stir. You are aiming to distract people, and nothing is
more distracting than a wealth of detail—fireworks, flags, music, uniforms,
marching soldiers, the feel of the crowd packed together. It becomes diffi-
cult to think straight, particularly if the symbols and details stir up patriotic
emotions.
Finally, words are important in seduction, and have a great deal of
power to confuse, distract, and boost the vanity of the target. But what is
most seductive in the long run is what you do not say, what you communi-
cate indirectly. Words come easily, and people distrust them. Anyone can
say the right words; and once they are said, nothing is binding, and they
may even be forgotten altogether. The gesture, the thoughtful gift, the little
details seem much more real and substantial. They are also much more
charming than lofty words about love, precisely because they speak for
themselves and let the seduced read into them more than is there. Never
tell someone what you are feeling; let them guess it in your looks and ges-
tures. That is the more convincing language.
276 • The Art of Seduction
Symbol: The Banquet. A
feast has been prepared in your honor. Everything has
been elaborately coordinated—the flowers, the decorations, the selec-
tion of guests, the dancers, the music, the five-course meal, the end-
lessly flowing wine. The Banquet loosens your tongue,
and also your inhibitions.
Reversal
There is no reversal. Details are essential to any successful seduction, and
cannot be ignored.
