150 • The Art of Seduction
The Eighteen Types
The Reformed Rake or Siren. People of this type were once happy-go-
lucky seducers who had their way with the opposite sex. But the day came
when they were forced to give this up—someone corraled them into a rela-
tionship, they were encountering too much social hostility, they were get-
ting older and decided to settle down. Whatever the reason, you can be
sure they feel some resentment and a sense of loss, as if a limb were miss-
ing. We are always trying to recapture pleasures we experienced in the past,
but the temptation is particularly great for the Reformed Rake or Siren be-
cause the pleasures they found in seduction were intense. These types are
ripe for the picking: all that is required is that you cross their path and offer
them the opportunity to resume their rakish or siren ways. Their blood will
stir and the call of their youth will overwhelm them.
It is critical, though, to give these types the illusion that they are the
ones doing the seducing. With the Reformed Rake, you must spark his in-
terest indirectly, then let him burn and glow with desire. With the Re-
formed Siren, you want to give her the impression that she still has the
irresistible power to draw a man in and make him give up everything for
her. Remember that what you are offering these types is not another rela-
tionship, another constriction, but rather the chance to escape the corral
and have some ran. Do not be put off if they are in a relationship; a preex-
isting commitment is often the perfect foil. If hooking them into a rela-
tionship is what you want, hide it as best you can and realize it may not be
possible. The Rake or Siren is unfaithful by nature; your ability to spark the
old feeling gives you power, but then you will have to live with the conse-
quences of their feckless ways.
The Disappointed Dreamer. As children, these types probably spent a lot
of time alone. To entertain themselves they developed a powerful fantasy
life, fed by books and films and other kinds of popular culture. And as they
get older, it becomes increasingly difficult to reconcile their fantasy life
with reality, and so they are often disappointed by what they get. This is
particularly true in relationships. They have been dreaming of romantic he-
roes, of danger and excitement, but what they have is lovers with human
frailties, the petty weaknesses of everyday life. As the years pass, they may
force themselves to compromise, because otherwise they would have to
spend their lives alone; but beneath the surface they are bitter and still hun-
gering for something grand and romantic.
You can recognize this type by the books they read and films they go to,
the way their ears prick up when told of the real-life adventures some peo-
ple manage to live out. In their clothes and home furnishings, a taste for
exuberant romance or drama will peek through. They are often trapped in
drab relationships, and little comments here and there will reveal their dis-
appointment and inner tension.
The Seducer's Victims—The Eighteen Types • 151
These types make for excellent and satisfying victims. First, they usually
have a great deal of pent-up passion and energy, which you can release and
focus on yourself. They also have great imaginations and will respond to
anything vaguely mysterious or romantic that you offer them. All you need
do is disguise some of your less than exalted qualities and give them a part
of their dream. This could be the chance to live out their adventures or be
courted by a chivalrous soul. If you give them a part of what they want
they will imagine the rest. At all cost, do not let reality break the illusion
you are creating. One moment of pettiness and they will be gone, more
bitterly disappointed than ever.
The Pampered Royal. These people were the classic spoiled children. All
of their wants and desires were met by an adoring parent—endless enter-
tainments, a parade of toys, whatever kept them happy for a day or two.
Where many children learn to entertain themselves, inventing games and
finding friends, Pampered Royals are taught that others will do the enter-
taining for them. Being spoiled, they get lazy, and as they get older and the
parent is no longer there to pamper them, they tend to feel quite bored and
restless. Their solution is to find pleasure in variety, to move quickly from
person to person, job to job, or place to place before boredom sets in. They
do not settle into relationships well because habit and routine of some kind
are inevitable in such affairs. But their ceaseless search for variety is tiring
for them and comes with a price: work problems, strings of unsatisfying ro-
mances, friends scattered across the globe. Do not mistake their restlessness
and infidelity for reality—what the Pampered Prince or Princess is really
looking for is one person, that parental figure, who will give them the
spoiling they crave.
To seduce this type, be ready to provide a lot of distraction—new
places to visit, novel experiences, color, spectacle. You will have to main-
tain an air of mystery, continually surprising your target with a new side to
your character. Variety is the key. Once Pampered Royals are hooked,
things get easier for they will quickly grow dependent on you and you can
put out less effort. Unless their childhood pampering has made them too
difficult and lazy, these types make excellent victims——they will be as loyal
to you as they once were to mommy or daddy. But you will have to do
much of the work. If you are after a long relationship, disguise it. Offer
long-term security to a Pampered Royal and you will induce a panicked
flight. Recognize these types by the turmoil in their past—job changes,
travel, short-term relationships—and by the air of aristocracy, no matter
their social class, that comes from once being treated like royalty.
The New Prude. Sexual prudery still exists, but it is less common than it
was. Prudery, however, is never just about sex; a prude is someone who is
excessively concerned with appearances, with what society considers ap-
