The Charismatic • 107
ing, androgynous, uninhibited, he was a man enacting strange fantasies be-
fore the public. The audience sensed this and was excited by it. It wasn't a
flamboyant style and appearance that gave Elvis charisma, but rather the
electrifying expression of his inner turmoil.
A crowd or group of any sort has a unique energy. Just below the sur-
face is desire, a constant sexual excitement that has to be repressed because
it is socially unacceptable. If you have the ability to rouse those desires, the
crowd will see you as having charisma. The key is learning to access your
own unconscious, as Elvis did when he let go. You are full of an excite-
ment that seems to come from some mysterious inner source. Your unin-
hibitedness will invite other people to open up, sparking a chain reaction:
their excitement in turn will animate you still more. The fantasies you
bring to the surface do not have to be sexual—any social taboo, anything
repressed and yearning for an outlet, will suffice. Make this felt in your
recordings, your artwork, your books. Social pressure keeps people so re-
pressed that they will be attracted to your charisma before they have even
met you in person.
The Savior. In March of 1917, the Russian parliament forced the coun-
try's ruler, Czar Nicholas, to abdicate and established a provisional govern-
ment. Russia was in rums. Its participation in World War I had been a
disaster; famine was spreading widely, the vast countryside was riven by
looting and lynch law, and soldiers were deserting from the army en masse.
Politically the country was bitterly divided; the main factions were the
right, the social democrats, and the left-wing revolutionaries, and each of
these groups was itself afflicted by dissension.
Into this chaos came the forty-seven-year-old Vladimir Ilyich Lenin. A
Marxist revolutionary, the leader of the Bolshevik Communist party, he
had suffered a twelve-year exile in Europe until, recognizing the chaos
overcoming Russia as the chance he had long been waiting for, he had hur-
ried back home. Now he called for the country to end its participation in
the war and for an immediate socialist revolution. In the first weeks after his
arrival, nothing could have seemed more ridiculous. As a man, Lenin
looked unimpressive; he was short and plain-featured. He had also spent
years away in Europe, isolated from his people and immersed in reading and
intellectual argument. Most important, his party was small, representing
only a splinter group within the loosely organized left coalition. Few took
him seriously as a national leader.
Undaunted, Lenin went to work. Wherever he went, he repeated the
same simple message: end the war, establish the rule of the proletariat,
abolish private property, redistribute wealth. Exhausted with the nation's
endless political infighting and the complexity of its problems, people be-
gan to listen. Lenin was so determined, so confident. He never lost his
cool. In the midst of a raucous debate, he would simply and logically de-
bunk each one of his adversaries' points. Workers and soldiers were im-He is their god. He leads
them like a thing \ Made
by some other deity than
nature, \ That shapes man
better; and they follow him
\ Against us brats with no
less confidence \ Than boys
pursuing summer butterflies
\ Or butchers killing
flies. . . .
—WILLIAM SHAKESPEARE,
CORIOLANUS
The roof did lift as Presley
came onstage. He sang for
twenty-five minutes while
the audience erupted like
Mount Vesuvius. "I never
saw such excitement and
screaming in my entire life,
ever before or since," said
[film director Hal] Kanter.
As an observer, he
describ-ed being stunned by
"an exhibition of public
mass hysteria . . . a tidal
wave of adoration surging
up from 9,000 people,
over the wall of police
flanking the stage, up over
the flood-lights, to the
performer and beyond him,
lifting him to frenzied
heights of response."
—A DESCRIPTION OF ELVIS
PRESLEY'S CONCERT AT THE
HAYRIDE THEATER, SHREVEPORT,
LOUISIANA, DECEMBER 17, 1956,
IN PETER WHITMER, THE INNER
ELVIS: A PSYCHOLOGICAL
BIOGRAPHY OF ELVIS AARON
PRESLEY
108 • The Art of Seduction
pressed by his firmness. Once, in the midst of a brewing riot, Lenin amazed
his chauffeur by jumping onto the running board of his car and directing
the way through the crowd, at considerable personal risk. Told that his ideas
had nothing to do with reality, he would answer, "So much the worse for
reality!"
Allied to Lenin's messianic confidence in his cause was his ability to or-
ganize. Exiled in Europe, his party had been scattered and diminished; in
keeping them together he had developed immense practical skills. In front
of a large crowd, he was a also powerful orator. His speech at the First All-
Russian Soviet Congress made a sensation; either revolution or a bourgeois
government, he cried, but nothing in between—enough of this compro-
mise in which the left was sharing. At a time when other politicians were
scrambling desperately to adapt to the national crisis, and seemed weak in
the process, Lenin was rock stable. His prestige soared, as did the member-
ship of the Bolshevik party
Most astounding of all was Lenin's effect on workers, soldiers, and peas-
ants. He would address these common people wherever he found them—in
the street, standing on a chair, his thumbs in his lapel, his speech an odd
mix of ideology, peasant aphorisms, and revolutionary slogans. They would
listen, enraptured. When Lenin died, in 1924—seven years after single-
handedly opening the way to the October Revolution of 1917, which had
swept him and the Bolsheviks into power—these same ordinary Russians
went into mourning. They worshiped at his tomb, where his body was
preserved on view; they told stories about him, developing a body of
Lenin folklore; thousands of newborn girls were christened "Ninel," Lenin
spelled backwards. This cult of Lenin assumed religious proportions.
There all kinds of misconceptions about charisma, which, paradoxically,
only add to its mystique. Charisma has little to do with an exciting physical
appearance or a colorful personality, qualities that elicit short—term interest.
Particularly in times of trouble, people are not looking for entertainment—
they want security, a better quality of life, social cohesion. Believe it or not,
a plain-looking man or woman with a clear vision, a quality of single-
mindedness, and practical skills can be devastatingly charismatic, provided it
is matched with some success. Never underestimate the power of success in
enhancing one's aura. But in a world teeming with compromisers and
fudgers whose indecisiveness only creates more disorder, one clear-minded
soul will be a magnet of attention—will have charisma.
One on one, or in a Zurich cafe before the revolution, Lenin had little
or no charisma. (His confidence was attractive, but many found his strident
manner irritating.) He won charisma when he was seen as the man who
could save the country. Charisma is not a mysterious quality that inhabits
you outside your control; it is an illusion in the eyes of those who see you
as having what they lack. Particularly in times of trouble, you can enhance
that illusion through calmness, resolution, and clear-minded practicality. It
also helps to have a seductively simple message. Call it the Savior Syn-No one could so fire others
with theif plans, no one
could so impose his will
and conquer by force of his
personality as this
seemingly so ordinary and
somewhat coarse man who
lacked any obvious sources
of charm. . . . Neither
Plekhanov nor Martov nor
anyone else possessed the
secret radiating from Lenin
of positively hypnotic effect
upon people—I would
even say, domination of
them. Plekhanov was
treated with deference,
Martov was loved, but
Lenin alone was followed
unhesitatingly as the only
indisputable leader. For
only Lenin represented that
rare phenomenon,
especially rare in Russia, of
a man of iron will and
indomitable energy who
combines fanatical faith in
the movement, the cause,
with no less faith in
himself.
—A. N. POTRESOV, QUOTED IN
DANKWART A. RUSTOW, ED.,
PHILOSOPHERS AND KINGS:
STUDIES IN LEADERSHIP
"I had hoped to see the
mountain eagle of our
party, the great man, great
physically as well as
politically. I had fancied
Lenin as a giant, stately
and imposing. Mow great
was my disappointment to
see a most ordinary-looking
man, below average height,
in no way, literally in no
way distinguishable from
ordinary mortals. "
—JOSEPH STALIN, ON MEETING
LENIN FOR THE FIRST TIME IN
1905, QUOTED IN RONALD W.
CLARK, LENIN:THE MAN
BEHIND THE MASK
