Give Them Space to Fall—The Pursuer Is Pursued • 391
a tantrum. But that never works, and we slowly realize that the only way to
keep her from rejecting us again is to imitate her—to be as loving, kind,
and affectionate as she is. This will bond her to us in the deepest way. The
pattern is ingrained in us for the rest of our lives: by experiencing a rejec-
tion or a coldness, we learn to court and pursue, to love.
Re-create this primal pattern in your seduction. First, shower your tar-
gets with affection. They will not be sure where this is coming from, but it
is a delightful feeling, and they will never want to lose it. When it does go
away, in your strategic step back, they will have moments of anxiety and
anger, perhaps throwing a tantrum, and then the same childlike reaction:
the only way to win you back, to have you for sure, will be to reverse the
pattern, to imitate you, to be the affectionate, giving one. It is the terror of
rejection that turns the tables.
This pattern will often repeat itself naturally in an affair or relationship.
One person goes cold, the other pursues, then goes cold in turn, making
the first person the pursuer, and on and on. As a seducer, do not leave this
to chance. Make it happen. You are teaching the other person to become a
seducer, just as the mother in her own way taught the child to return her
love by turning her back. For your own sake learn to relish this reversal of
roles. Do not merely play at being the pursued, but enjoy it, give in to it.
The pleasure of being pursued by your victim can often surpass the thrill of
the hunt.
Symbol: The
Pomegranate. Carefully cultivated and
tended, the pomegranate begins to ripen. Do not
gather it too early or force it off the stem—it will be hard and
bitter. Let the fruit grow heavy and full of juice, then stand back—
it will fall on its own. That is when its pulp is most delicious.
392 • The Art of Seduction
Reversal
There are moments when creating space and absence will blow up in
your face. An absence at a critical moment in the seduction can make
the target lose interest in you. It also leaves too much to chance—while you
are away, they could find another person, who will distract their thoughts
from you. Cleopatra easily seduced Mark Antony, but after their first en-
counters, he returned to Rome. Cleopatra was mysterious and alluring, but
if she let too much time pass, he would forget her charms. So she let go of
her usual coquetry and came after him when he was on one of his military
campaigns. She knew that once he saw her, he would fall under her spell
again and pursue her.
Use absence only when you are sure of the target's affection, and never
let it go on too long. It is most effective later in the seduction. Also, never
create too much space—don't write too rarely, don't act too cold, don't
show too much interest in someone else. That is the strategy of mixing
pleasure with pain, detailed in chapter 20, and will create a dependent vic-
tim, or will even make him or her give up completely. Some people, too,
are inveterately passive: they are waiting for you to make the bold move,
and if you don't, they will think you are weak. The pleasure to be had from
such a victim is less than the pleasure you will get from someone more ac-
tive. But if you are involved with such a type, do what you need to if you
are to have your way, then end the affair and move on.
