The Star • 125
Kennedy's father, Joseph, had once been a movie producer, and Kennedy
himself had spent time in Hollywood, hobnobbing with actors and trying
to figure out what made them stars. He was particularly fascinated with
Gary Cooper, Montgomery Clift, and Cary Grant; he often called Grant
for advice.
Hollywood had found ways to unite the entire country around cer-
tain themes, or myths—often the great American myth of the West. The
great stars embodied mythic types: John Wayne the patriarch, Clift
the Promethean rebel, Jimmy Stewart the noble hero, Marilyn Monroe the
siren. These were not mere mortals but gods and goddesses to be dreamed
and fantasized about. All of Kennedy's actions were framed in the conven-
tions of Hollywood. He did not argue with his opponents, he confronted
them dramatically. He posed, and in visually fascinating ways—whether
with his wife, with his children, or alone onstage. He copied the facial
expressions, the presence, of a Dean or a Cooper. He did not discuss
policy details but waxed eloquent about grand mythic themes, the kind
that could unite a divided nation. And all this was calculated for television,
for Kennedy mostly existed as a televised image. That image haunted
our dreams. Well before his assassination, Kennedy attracted fantasies of
America's lost innocence with his call for a renaissance of the pioneer spirit,
a New Frontier.
Of all the character types, the Mythic Star is perhaps the most powerful
of all. People are divided by all kinds of consciously recognized categories—
race, gender, class, religion, politics. It is impossible, then, to gain power on
a grand scale, or to win an election, by drawing on conscious awareness; an
appeal to any one group will only alienate another. Unconsciously, how-
ever, there is much we share. All of us are mortal, all of us know fear, all of
us have been stamped with the imprint of parent figures; and nothing con-
jures up this shared experience more than myth. The patterns of myth,
born out of warring feelings of helplessness on the one hand and thirst for
immortality on the other, are deeply engraved in us all.
Mythic Stars are figures of myth come to life. To appropriate their
power, you must first study their physical presence—how they adopt a dis-
tinctive style, are cool and visually arresting. Then you must assume the
pose of a mythic figure: the rebel, the wise patriarch, the adventurer. (The
pose of a Star who has struck one of these mythic poses might do the trick.)
Make these connections vague; they should never be obvious to the con-
scious mind. Your words and actions should invite interpretation beyond
their surface appearance; you should seem to be dealing not with specific,
nitty-gritty issues and details but with matters of life and death, love and
hate, authority and chaos. Your opponent, similarly, should be framed
not merely as an enemy for reasons of ideology or competition but as a vil-
lain, a demon. People are hopelessly susceptible to myth, so make yourself
the hero of a great drama. And keep your distance—let people identify
with you without being able to touch you. They can only watch and
dream.his or her own contrib-
ution. When we speak of
the myth of the star, we
mean first of all the process
of divinization which the
movie actor undergoes, a
process that makes him the
idol of crowds.
—EDGAR MORIN, THE STARS,
TRANSLATED BY RICHARD
HOWARD
Age: 22, Sex: female,
Nationality: British,
Profession: medical student
"[Deanna Durbin] became
my first and only screen
idol. I wanted to be as
much like her as possible,
both in my manners and
clothes. Whenever I was to
get a new dress, I would
find from my collection a
particularly nice picture of
Deanna and ask for a dress
like she was wearing. I did
my hair as much like hers
as 1 could manage. If I
found myself in any
annoying or aggravating
situation . . . I found
myself wondering what
Deanna would do and
modified my own reactions
accordingly. ..." • Age:
26, Sex: female, Nation-
ality: British "I only fell in
love once with a movie
actor. It was Conrad Veidt.
His magnetism and his
personality got me. His
voice and gestures fascin-
ated me. I hated him,
feared him, loved him.
When he died it seemed to
me that a vital part of my
imagination died too, and
my world of dreams was
bare. "
—J. P. MAYER, BRITISH
CINEMAS AND THEIR
AUDIENCES
126 • The Art of Seduction
Jack's life had more to do with myth, magic, legend, saga,
and story than with political theory or political science.
—JACQUELINE KENNEDY, A WEEK AFTER JOHN KENNEDY'S DEATH
Keys to the Character
Seduction is a form of persuasion that seeks to bypass consciousness, stir-
ring the unconscious mind instead. The reason for this is simple: we are
so surrounded by stimuli that compete for our attention, bombarding us
with obvious messages, and by people who are overtly political and manipu-
lative, that we are rarely charmed or deceived by them. We have grown
increasingly cynical. Try to persuade a person by appealing to their con-
sciousness, by saying outright what you want, by showing all your cards, and
what hope do you have? You are just one more irritation to be tuned out.
To avoid this fate you must learn the art of insinuation, of reaching the
unconscious. The most eloquent expression of the unconscious is the
dream, which is intricately connected to myth; waking from a dream, we
are often haunted by its images and ambiguous messages. Dreams obsess us
because they mix the real and the unreal. They are filled with real charac-
ters, and often deal with real situations, yet they are delightfully irrational,
pushing realities to the extremes of delirium. If everything in a dream were
realistic, it would have no power over us; if everything were unreal, we
would feel less involved in its pleasures and fears. Its fusion of the two is
what makes it haunting. This is what Freud called the "uncanny": some-
thing that seems simultaneously strange and familiar.
We sometimes experience the uncanny in waking life—in a déjà vu, a
miraculous coincidence, a weird event that recalls a childhood experience.
People can have a similar effect. The gestures, the words, the very being of
men like Kennedy or Andy Warhol, for example, evoke both the real and
the unreal: we may not realize it (and how could we, really), but they are
like dream figures to us. They have qualities that anchor them in reality—
sincerity, playfulness, sensuality—but at the same time their aloofness, their
superiority, their almost surreal quality makes them seem like something
out of a movie.
These types have a haunting, obsessive effect on people. Whether in
public or in private, they seduce us, making us want to possess them both
physically and psychologically. But how can we possess a person from a
dream, or a movie star or political star, or even one of those real-life fasci-
nators, like a Warhol, who may cross our path? Unable to have them, we
become obsessed with them—they haunt our thoughts, our dreams, our
fantasies. We imitate them unconsciously. The psychologist Sandor Fer-
enczi calls this "introjection": another person becomes part of our ego, we
internalize their character. That is the insidious seductive power of a Star, a
power you can appropriate by making yourself into a cipher, a mix of the
real and the unreal. Most people are hopelessly banal; that is, far too real.The savage worships idols
of wood and stone; the
civilized man, idols of flesh
and blood.
—GEORGE BERNARD SHAW
When the eye's rays
encounter some clear, well-
polished object—be it
burnished steel or glass or
water, a brilliant stone, or
any other polished and
gleaming substance
having luster, glitter, and
sparkle . . . those rays of
the eye are reflected back,
and the observer then
beholds himself and
obtains an ocular vision of
his own person. This is
what you see when you
look into a mirror; in that
situation you are as it were
looking at yourself through
the eyes of another.
—IBN HAZM, THE RING OF
THE DOVE:A TREATISE ON THE
ART AND PRACTICE OF ARAB
LOVE, TRANSLATED BY A.J.
ARBERRY
The only important
constellation of collective
seduction produced by
modern times [is] that of
film stars or cinema
idols. . . . They were our
only myth in an age
incapable of generating
great myths or figures of
seduction comparable to
those of mythology or art. •
The cinema's power lives in
its myth. Its stones, its
psychological portraits,
its imagination or realism,
the meaningful impressions
it leaves—these are all
secondary. Only the myth
is powerful, and at the
heart of the
cinematographic myth lies
seduction—that of the
renowned seductive figure,
a man or woman (but
