The Dandy • 45
employing feminine weapons against her; without losing his masculine
identity, the more subtly feminine he becomes the more effective the se-
duction. Do not be one of those who believe that what is most seductive is
being devastatingly masculine. The Feminine Dandy has a much more sin-
ister effect. He lures the woman in with exactly what she wants—a familiar,
pleasing, graceful presence. Mirroring feminine psychology, he displays at-
tention to his appearance, sensitivity to detail, a slight coquettishness—but
also a hint of male cruelty. Women are narcissists, in love with the charms
of their own sex. By showing them feminine charm, a man can mesmerize
and disarm them, leaving them vulnerable to a bold, masculine move.
The Feminine Dandy can seduce on a mass scale. No single woman
really possesses him—he is too elusive—but all can fantasize about doing so.
The key is ambiguity: your sexuality is decidedly heterosexual, but your
body and psychology float delightfully back and forth between the two
poles.
I am a woman. Every artist is a woman and should have a
taste for other women. Artists who are homosexual cannot
be true artists because they like men, and since they them-
selves are women they are reverting to normality.
—PABLO PICASSO
The Masculine Dandy
In the 1870s, Pastor Henrik Gillot was the darling of the St. Petersburg
intelligentsia. He was young, handsome, well-read in philosophy and lit-
erature, and he preached a kind of enlightened Christianity. Dozens of
young girls had crushes on him and would flock to his sermons just to look
at him. In 1878, however, he met a girl who changed his life. Her name
was Lou von Salomé (later known as Lou Andreas-Salomé), and she was
seventeen; he was forty-two.
Salomé was pretty, with radiant blue eyes. She had read a lot, particu-
larly for a girl her age, and was interested in the gravest philosophical and
religious issues. Her intensity, her intelligence, her responsiveness to ideas
cast a spell over Gillot. When she entered his office for her increasingly fre-
quent discussions with him, the place seemed brighter and more alive. Per-
haps she was flirting with him, in the unconscious manner of a young
girl—yet when Gillot admitted to himself that he was in love with her, and
proposed marriage, Salomé was horrified. The confused pastor never quite
got over Lou von Salomé, becoming the first of a long string of famous
men to be the victim of a lifelong unfulfilled infatuation with her.
In 1882, the German philosopher Friedrich Nietzsche was wandering
around Italy alone. In Genoa he received a letter from his friend Paul Rée,
a Prussian philosopher whom he admired, recounting his discussions with a
remarkable young Russian woman, Lou von Salomé, in Rome. Salomé washis body, dived quickly into
the stream. As he raised
first one arm and then the
other, his body gleamed in
the clear water, as if
someone had encased
anivory statue or white
lilies in transparent glass.
"I have won! He is
mine!" cried the nymph,
and flinging aside her
garments, plunged into the
heart of the pool. The boy
fought against her, but she
held him, and snatched
kisses as he struggled,
placing her hands beneath
him, stroking
his unwilling breast, and
clinging to him, now on
this side, and now on that.
• Finally, in spite of ail his
efforts to slip from her
grasp, she twined around
him, like a serpent when it
is being carried off into the
air by the king of birds: for,
as it hangs from the eagle's
beak, the snake coils round
his head and talons and
with its tail hampers his
beating wings. . . ."You
may fight, you rogue, but
you will not escape. May
the gods grant me this, may
no time to come ever
separate him from me, or
me from him!" Her prayers
found favour with the gods:
for, as they lay together,
their bodies were united
and from being two persons
they became one. As when
a gardener grafts a branch
on to a tree, and sees the
two unite as they grow,
and come to maturity
together, so when their
limbs met in that clinging
embrace the nymph and the
boy were no longer two, but
a single form, possessed of
a dual nature, which could
not be called male or
female, but seemed to be at
once both and neither.
—OVID, METAMORPHOSES,
TRANSLATED BY MARY M. INNES
46 • The Art of Seduction
there on holiday with her mother; Rée had managed to accompany her on
long walks through the city, unchaperoned, and they had had many conver-
sations. Her ideas on God and Christianity were quite similar to Nietz-
sche's, and when Rée had told her that the famous philosopher was a friend
of his, she had insisted that he invite Nietzsche to join them. In subsequent
letters Ree described how mysteriously captivating Salomé was, and how
anxious she was to meet Nietzsche. The philosopher soon went to Rome.
When Nietzsche finally met Salomé, he was overwhelmed. She had the
most beautiful eyes he had ever seen, and during their first long talk those
eyes lit up so intensely that he could not help feeling there was something
erotic about her excitement. Yet he was also confused: Salomé kept her dis-
tance, and did not respond to his compliments. What a devilish young
woman. A few days later she read him a poem of hers, and he cried; her
ideas about life were so like his own. Deciding to seize the moment, Nietz-
sche proposed marriage. (He did not know that Ree had done so as well.)
Salomé declined. She was interested in philosophy, life, adventure, not mar-
riage. Undaunted, Nietzsche continued to court her. On an excursion to
Lake Orta with Rée, Salomé, and her mother, he managed to get the girl
alone, accompanying her on a walk up Monte Sacro while the others stayed
behind. Apparently the views and Nietzsche's words had the proper pas-
sionate effect; in a later letter to her, he described this walk as "the most
beautiful dream of my life." Now he was a man possessed: all he could
think about was marrying Salomé and having her all to himself.
A few months later Salomé visited Nietzsche in Germany. They took
long walks together, and stayed up all night discussing philosophy. She mir-
rored his deepest thoughts, anticipated his ideas about religion. Yet when
he again proposed marriage, she scolded him as conventional: it was Nietz-
sche, after all, who had developed a philosophical defense of the superman,
the man above everyday morality, yet Salomé was by nature far less conven-
tional than he was. Her firm, uncompromising manner only deepened the
spell she cast over him, as did her hint of cruelty When she finally left him,
making it clear that she had no intention of marrying him, Nietzsche was
devastated. As an antidote to his pain, he wrote Thus Spake Zarathustra, a
book full of sublimated eroticism and deeply inspired by his talks with her.
From then on Salomé was known throughout Europe as the woman who
had broken Nietzsche's heart.
Salomé moved to Berlin. Soon the city's greatest intellectuals were
falling under the spell of her independence and free spirit. The playwrights
Gerhart Hauptmann and Franz Wedekind became infatuated with her; in
1897, the great Austrian poet Rainer Maria Rilke fell in love with her. By
that time her reputation was widely known, and she was a published novel-
ist. This certainly played a part in seducing Rilke, but he was also attracted
by a kind of masculine energy he found in her that he had never seen in a
woman. Rilke was then twenty-two, Salomé thirty-six. He wrote her love
letters and poems, followed her everywhere, and began an affair with her
that was to last several years. She corrected his poetry, imposed disciplineDandyism is not even, as
many unthinking people
seem to suppose, an
immoderate interest in
personal appearance and
material elegance. For the
true dandy these things are
only a symbol oj the
aristocratic superiority of his
personality. . . . • What,
then, is this ruling passion
that has turned into a creed
and created its own skilled
tyrants? What is this
unwritten constitution that
has created so haughty a
caste? It is, above all, a
burning need to acquire
originality, within the
apparent bounds of
convention. It is a sort of
cult of oneself, which can
dispense even with what are
commonly called illusions. It
is the delight in causing
astonishment, and the
proud satisfaction of
never oneself being
astonished. . . .
—CHARLES BAUDELAIRE, THE
DANDY, QUOTED IN VICE: AN
ANTHOLOGY, EDITED BY
RICHARD DAVENPORT-HINES
In the midst of this display
of statesmanship,
eloquence, cleverness, and
exalted ambition,
Alcibiades lived a life of
prodigious luxury,
drunkenness, debauchery,
and insolence. He was
effeminate in his dress and
would walk through the
market-place trailing his
long purple robes, and he
spent extravagantly. He
had the decks of his
triremes cut away to allow
him to sleep more
comfortably, and his
bedding was slung on cords,
rather than spread on the
hard planks. He had a
golden shield made for
him, which was
emblazoned not with any
