Festival Time and Place
Centuries ago, life in most cultures was filled with work and routine.
But at certain moments in the year, this life was interrupted by festi-
val. During these festivals—saturnalias of ancient Rome, the maypole festi-
vals of Europe, the great potlatches of the Chinook Indians—work in the
fields or marketplace stopped. The entire tribe or town gathered in a sacred
space set apart for the festival. Temporarily relieved of duty and responsi-
bility, people were granted license to run amok; they would wear masks or
costumes, which gave them other identities, sometimes those of powerful
figures reenacting the great myths of their culture. The festival was a
tremendous release from the burdens of daily life. It altered people's sense
of time, bringing moments in which they stepped outside of themselves.
Time seemed to stand still. Something like this experience can still be
found in the world's great surviving carnivals.
The festival represented a break in a person's daily life, a radically differ-
ent experience from routine. On a more intimate level, that is how you
must envision your seductions. As the process advances, your targets expe-
rience a radical difference from daily life—a freedom from work or respon-
sibility. Plunged into pleasure and play, they can act differently, can become
someone else, as if they were wearing a mask. The time you spend with
them is devoted to them and nothing else. Instead of the usual rotation of
work and rest, you are giving them grand, dramatic moments that stand
out. You bring them to places unlike the places they see in daily life—
heightened, theatrical places. Physical environment strongly affects people's
moods; a place dedicated to pleasure and play insinuates thoughts of plea-
sure and play. When your victims return to their duties and to the real
world, they feel the contrast strongly and they will start to crave that other
place into which you have drawn them. What you are essentially creating is
festival time and place, moments when the real world stops and fantasy
takes over. Our culture no longer supplies such experiences, and people
yearn for them. That is why almost everyone is waiting to be seduced and
why they will fall into your arms if you play this right.
The following are key components to reproducing festival time and place:
Create theatrical effects. Theater creates a sense of a separate, magical
world. The actors' makeup, the fake but alluring sets, the slightly unreal
433
434 • Appendix A: Seductive Environment /Seductive Time
costumes—these heightened visuals, along with the story of the play, create
illusion. To produce this effect in real life, you must fashion your clothes,
makeup, and attitude to have a playful, artificial, edge—a feeling that you
have dressed for the pleasure of your audience. This is the goddesslike effect
of a Marlene Dietrich, or the fascinating effect of a dandy like Beau Brum-
mel. Your encounters with your targets should also have a sense of drama,
achieved through the settings you choose and through your actions. The
target should not know what will happen next. Create suspense through
twists and turns that lead to the happy ending; you are performing. When-
ever your targets meet you, they are returned to this vague feeling of being
in a play. You both have the thrill of wearing masks, of playing a different
role from the one your life has allotted you.
Use the visual language of pleasure. Certain kinds of visual stimuli signal
that you are not in the real world. You want to avoid images that have
depth, which might provoke thought, or guilt; instead, you should work in
environments that are all surface, full of glittering objects, mirrors, pools of
water, a constant play of light. The sensory overload of these spaces creates
an intoxicating, buoyant feeling. The more artificial, the better. Show your
targets a playful world, full of the sights and sounds that excite the baby or
child within them. Luxury—the sense that money has been spent or even
wasted—adds to the feeling that the real world of duty and morality has
been banished. Call it the brothel effect.
Keep it crowded or close. People crowding together raise the psychologi-
cal temperature to hothouse levels. Festivals and carnivals depend on the
contagious feeling a crowd creates. Bring your target to such environments
sometimes, to lower their normal defensiveness. Similarly, any kind of
situation that brings people together in a small space for a long period of
time is extremely conducive to seduction. For years, Sigmund Freud had a
small, tight-knit stable of disciples who attended his private lectures and
who engaged in an astonishing number of love affairs. Either lead the se-
duced into a crowded, festivallike environment or go trolling for targets in a
closed world.
Manufacture mystical effects. Spiritual or mystical effects distract people's
minds from reality, making them feel elevated and euphoric. From here it
is but a small step to physical pleasure. Use whatever props are at hand—
astrology books, angelic imagery, mystical-sounding music from some far-
off culture. The great eighteenth-century Austrian charlatan Franz Mesmer
filled his salons with harp music, the perfume of exotic incense, and a fe-
male voice singing in a distant room. On the walls he put stained glass and
