Preparing for the Hunt
The young Vicomte de Valmont was a notorious libertine in the Paris of
the 1770s, the ruin of many a young girl and the ingenious seducer of
the wives of illustrious aristocrats. But after a while the repetitiveness of it
all began to bore him; his successes came too easily So one year, during the
sweltering, slow month of August, he decided to take a break from Paris
and visit his aunt at her château in the provinces. Life there was not what
he was used to—there were country walks, chats with the local vicar, card
games. His city friends, particularly his fellow libertine and confidante the
Marquise de Merteuil, expected him to hurry back.
There were other guests at the château, however, including the Prési-
dente de Tourvel, a twenty-two-year-old woman whose husband was tem-
porarily absent, having work to do elsewhere. The Présidente had been
languishing at the château, waiting for him to join her. Valmont had met
her before; she was certainly beautiful, but had a reputation as a prude who
was extremely devoted to her husband. She was not a court lady; her taste
in clothing was atrocious (she always covered her neck with ghastly frills)
and her conversation lacked wit. For some reason, however, far from Paris,
Valmont began to see these traits in a new light. He followed her to the
chapel where she went every morning to pray. He caught glimpses of her at
dinner, or playing cards. Unlike the ladies of Paris, she seemed unaware of
her charms; this excited him. Because of the heat, she wore a simple linen
dress, which revealed her figure. A piece of muslin covered her breasts, let-
ting him more than imagine them. Her hair, unfashionable in its slight dis-
order, conjured the bedroom. And her face—he had never noticed how
expressive it was. Her features lit up when she gave alms to a beggar; she
blushed at the slightest praise. She was so natural and unself-conscious. And
when she talked of her husband, or religious matters, he could sense the
depth of her feelings. If such a passionate nature were ever detoured into a
love affair. . . .
Valmont extended his stay at the château, much to the delight of his
aunt, who could not have guessed at the reason. And he wrote to the Mar-
quise de Merteuil, explaining his new ambition: to seduce Madame de
Tourvel. The Marquise was incredulous. He wanted to seduce this prude?
If he succeeded, how little pleasure she would give him, and if he failed,
what a disgrace—the great libertine unable to seduce a wife whose husband
was far away! She wrote a sarcastic letter, which only inflamed Valmont fur-The ninth • Have I
become blind? Has the
inner eye of the soul lost its
power? I have seen her, but
it is as if I had seen a
heavenly revelation—so
completely has her image
vanished again for me. In
vain do I summon all the
powers of my soul in order
to conjure up this image. If
I ever see her again, I shall
be able to recognize her
instantly, even though she
stands among a hundred
others. Now she has fled,
and the eye of my soul tries
in vain to overtake her
with its longing. I was
walking along Langelinie,
seemingly nonchalantly
and without paying
attention to my
surroundings, although my
reconnoitering glance left-
nothing unobserved—and
then my eyes fell upon her.
My eyes fixed
unswervingly upon her.
They no longer obeyed
their master's will; it was
impossible for me to shift
my gaze and thus overlook
the object I wanted to
see—I did not look, I
stared. As a fencer freezes
in his lunge, so my eyes
were fixed, petrified in the
direction initially taken. It
was impossible to look
169
170 • The Art of Seduction
ther. The conquest of this notoriously virtuous woman would prove his
greatest seduction. His reputation would only be enhanced.
There was an obstacle, though, that seemed to make success almost im-
possible: everyone knew Valmont's reputation, including the Présidente.
She knew how dangerous it was to ever be alone with him, how people
would talk about the least association with him. Valmont did everything
to belie his reputation, even going so far as to attend church services and
seem repentant of his ways. The Présidente noticed, but still kept her dis-
tance. The challenge she presented to Valmont was irresistible, but could he
meet it?
Valmont decided to test the waters. One day he arranged a little walk
with the Présidente and his aunt. He chose a delightful path that they had
never taken before, but at a certain point they reached a little ditch, unsuit-
able for a lady to cross on her own. And yet, Valmont said, the rest of the
walk was too nice for them to turn back, and he gallantly picked up his
aunt in his arms and carried her across the ditch, making the Présidente
laugh uproariously. But then it was her turn, and Valmont purposefully
picked her up a little awkwardly, so that she caught at his arms, and while
he was holding her against him he could feel her heart beating faster, and
saw her blush. His aunt saw this too, and cried out, "The child is afraid!"
But Valmont sensed otherwise. Now he knew that the challenge could be
met, that the Présidente could be won. The seduction could proceed.
Interpretation. Valmont, the Présidente de Tourvel, and the Marquise de
Merteuil are all characters in the eighteenth-century French novel Danger-
ous Liaisons, by Choderlos de Laclos. (The character of Valmont was in-
spired by several real-life libertines of the time, most prominent of all the
Duke de Richelieu.) In the story, Valmont worries that his seductions have
become mechanical; he makes a move, and the woman almost always re-
sponds the same way. But no two seductions should be the same—a differ-
ent target should change the whole dynamic. Valmont's problem is that he
is always seducing the same type—the wrong type. He realizes this when he
meets Madame de Tourvel.
It is not because her husband is a count that he decides to seduce her,
or because she is stylishly dressed, or is desired by other men—the usual
reasons. He chooses her because, in her unconscious way, she has already
seduced him. A bare arm, an unrehearsed laugh, a playful manner—all
these have captured his attention, because none of them is contrived. Once
he falls under her spell, the strength of his desire will make his subsequent
maneuvers seem less calculated; he is apparently unable to help himself.
And his strong emotions will slowly infect her.
Beyond the effect the Présidente has on Valmont, she has other traits
that make her the perfect victim. She is bored, which draws her toward ad-
venture. She is naive, and unable to see through his tricks. Finally, the
Achilles' heel: she believes herself immune to seduction. Almost all of usdown, impossible to
withdraw my glance,
impossible to see, because I
saw far too much. The
only thing I have retained
is that she had on a green
cloak, that is all—one
could call it capturing the
cloud instead of Juno; she
has escaped me . . .and
left only her cloak
behind. . . . The girl made
an impression on me. •
The sixteenth • . . . I feel
no impatience, for she must
live here in the city, and at
this moment that is enough
for me. This possibility is
the condition for the proper
appearance of her image—
everything
will be enjoyed in slow
drafts. . . . • The
nineteenth • Cordelia,
then, is her name!
Cordelia! It is a beautiful
name, and that, too, is
important, since it can
often be very disturbing to
have to name an ugly
name together with the
most tender adjectives.
—SØREN KIERKEGAARD, THE
SEDUCER'S DIARY, TRANSLATED
BY HOWARD V. HONG AND
EDNA H. HONG
Love as understood by
Don Juan is a feeling akin
to a taste for hunting. It is
a craving for an activity
which needs an incessant
diversity of stimuli to
challenge skill.
—STENDHAL, LOVE,
TRANSLATED BY GILBERT AND
SUZANNE SALE
It is not the quality of the
desired object that gives us
pleasure, but rather the
energy of our appetites.
—CHARLES BAUDELAIRE, THE
END OF DON JUAN
