The Anti-Seducer • 143
woman should disguise—she should create the impression that what she
was after was pleasure. The person who is obviously angling for money or
other material reward can only repel. If that is your intention, if you are
looking for something other than pleasure—for money, for power—never
show it. The suspicion of an ulterior motive is anti-seductive. Never let
anything break the illusion.
6. In 1868, Queen Victoria of England hosted her first private meeting
with the country's new prime minister, William Gladstone. She had met
him before, and knew his reputation as a moral absolutist, but this was to be
a ceremony, an exchange of pleasantries. Gladstone, however, had no pa-
tience for such things. At that first meeting he explained to the queen his
theory of royalty: the queen, he believed, had to play an exemplary role
in England—a role she had lately failed to live up to, for she was overly
private.
This lecture set a bad tone for the future, and things only got worse:
soon Victoria was receiving letters from Gladstone, addressing the subject
in even greater depth. Half of them she never bothered to read, and soon
she was doing everything she could to avoid contact with the leader of her
government; if she had to see him, she made the meeting as brief as possi-
ble. To that end, she never allowed him to sit down in her presence, hoping
that a man his age would soon tire and leave. For once he got going on a
subject dear to his heart, he did not notice your look of disinterest or the
tears in your eyes from yawning. His memoranda on even the simplest of
issues would have to be translated into plain English for her by a member of
her staff. Worst of all, Gladstone argued with her, and his arguments had a
way of making her feel stupid. She soon learned to nod her head and ap-
pear to agree with whatever abstract point he was trying to make. In a let-
ter to her secretary, referring to herself in the third person, she wrote, "She
always felt in [Gladstone's] manner an overbearing obstinacy and imperi-
ousness . . . which she never experienced from anyone else, and which she
found most disagreeable." Over the years, these feelings hardened into an
unwaning hatred.
As the head of the Liberal Party, Gladstone had a nemesis, Benjamin
Disraeli, the head of the Conservative Party. He considered Disraeli amoral,
a devilish Jew. At one session of Parliament, Gladstone tore into his rival,
scoring point after point as he described where his opponents policies
would lead. Growing angry as he spoke (as usually happened when he
talked of Disraeli), he pounded the speaker's table with such force that pens
and papers went flying. Through all of this Disraeli seemed half-asleep.
When Gladstone had finished, he opened his eyes, rose to his feet, and
calmly walked up to the table. "The right honorable gentleman," he said,
"has spoken with much passion, much eloquence, and much—ahem—
violence." Then, after a drawn-out pause, he continued, "But the damage
can be repaired"—and he proceeded to gather up everything that had fallen
144 • The Art of Seduction
from the table and put them back in place. The speech that followed was all
the more masterful for its calm and ironic contrast to Gladstone's. The
members of Parliament were spellbound, and all of them agreed he had
won the day.
If Disraeli was the consummate social seducer and charmer, Gladstone was
the Anti-Seducer. Of course he had supporters, mostly among the more
puritanical elements of society—he twice defeated Disraeli in a general
election. But he found it hard to broaden his appeal beyond the circle of
believers. Women in particular found him insufferable. Of course they had
no vote at the time, so they were little political liability; but Gladstone had
no patience for a feminine point of view. A woman, he felt, had to learn to
see things as a man did, and it was his purpose in life to educate those he
felt were irrational or abandoned by God.
It did not take long for Gladstone to wear on anyone's nerves. That is
the nature of people who are convinced of some truth, but have no pa-
tience for a different perspective or for dealing with someone else's psy-
chology. These types are bullies, and in the short term they often get their
way, particularly among the less aggressive. But they stir up a lot of resent-
ment and unspoken antipathy, which eventually trips them up. People see
through their righteous moral stance, which is most often a cover for a
power play—morality is a form of power. A seducer never seeks to per-
suade directly, never parades his or her morality, never lectures or imposes.
Everything is subtle, psychological, and indirect.
Symbol: The
Crab. In a harsh world, the crab sur-
vives by its hardened shell, by the threat of its
pincers, and by burrowing into the sand. No one dares
get too close. But the Crab cannot surprise its enemy and has
little mobility. Its defensive strength is its supreme limitation.
