244 • The Art of Seduction
friend, who is also absolutely my master," she replied. "It is to him I owe
my wealth." She asked if he had a lover. Yes, he replied. She then said, in a
mysterious tone, "I warn you that if you once allow me to take her place in
your heart, no power on earth can tear me from it." She then gave him the
key to the villa and told him to meet her there in two nights. He kissed her
through the grating and left in a daze. "I passed the next two days in a state
of feverish impatience," he wrote, "which prevented me from sleeping or
eating. Over and above birth, beauty, and wit, my new conquest possessed
an additional charm: she was forbidden fruit. I was about to become a rival
of the Church." He imagined her in her habit, and with her shaven head.
He arrived at the villa at the appointed hour. Mathilde was waiting for
him. To his surprise, she wore an elegant dress, and somehow she had
avoided having her head shaved, for her hair was in a magnificent chignon.
Casanova began to kiss her. She resisted, but only slightly, and then pulled
back, saying a meal was ready for them. Over dinner she filled in a few
more of the gaps: her money allowed her to bribe certain people, so that
she could escape from the convent every so often. She had mentioned
Casanova to her friend and master, and he had approved their liaison. He
must be old? Casanova asked. No, she replied, a glint in her eye, he is in his
forties, and quite handsome. After supper, a bell rang—her signal to hurry
back to the convent, or she would be caught. She changed back into her
habit and left.
A beautiful vista now seemed to stretch before Casanova, of months
spent in the villa with this delightful creature, all of it courtesy of the mys-
terious master who paid for it all. He soon returned to the convent to
arrange the next meeting. They would rendezvous in a square in Venice,
then retire to the villa. At the appointed time and place, Casanova saw a
man approach him. Fearing it was her mysterious friend, or some other
man sent to kill him, he recoiled. The man circled behind him, then came
up close: it was Mathilde, wearing a mask and men's clothes. She laughed at
the fright she had given him. What a devilish nun. He had to admit that
dressed as a man she excited him even more.
Casanova began to suspect that all was not as it seemed. For one, he
found a collection of libertine novels and pamphlets in Mathilde's house.
Then she made blasphemous comments, for example about the joy they
would have together during Lent, "mortifying their flesh." Now she re-
ferred to her mysterious friend as her lover. A plan evolved in his mind to
take her away from this man and from the convent, eloping with her and
possessing her himself.
A few days later he received a letter from her, in which she made a con-
fession: during one of their more passionate trysts at the villa, her lover
had hidden in a closet, watching the whole thing. The lover, she told him,
was the French ambassador to Venice, and Casanova had impressed him.
Casanova was not one to be fooled with like this, yet the next day he was
back at the convent, submissively arranging for another tryst. This time she
showed up at the hour they had named, and he embraced her—only tobaron of Saint-Cricq, for
example, with his ice cream
boots: one very hot day, he
ordered at Tortonis two ice
creams, the vanilla served
in his right boot, the
strawberry in his left
boot. . . . The Count
Saint-Germain loved to
bring his friends to the
theater, in his voluptuous
carriage lined in pink satin
and drawn by two black
horses with enormous tails;
he asked his friends in that
inimitable tone of his:
"Which piece of
entertainment did you wish
to see? Vaudeville, the
Variety show, the Palais-
Royal theater? I took the
liberty of purchasing a box
for all three of them."
Once the choice was made,
with a look of great
disdain, he would take the
unused tickets, roll them
up, and use them to light
his cigar.
—MAUD DE BELLEROCHE,
DU DANDY AU PLAY-BOY
While Shahzaman sat at
one of the windows
overlooking the king's
garden, he saw a door open
in the palace, through
which came twenty slave
girls and twenty negroes.
In their midst was his
brother's [King
Shahriyar's] queen, a
woman of surpassing
beauty. They made their
way to the fountain, where
they all undressed and sat
on the grass. The king's
wife then called out:
"Come Mass'ood!" and
there promptly came to her
a black slave, who mounted
her after smothering her
with embraces and kisses.
So also did the negroes
with the slave girls, reveling
together till the approach of
night. ...•... And so
Keep Them in Suspense—What Comes Next? • 245
find that he was embracing Caterina, dressed up in Mathilde's clothes.
Mathilde had befriended Caterina and learned her story. Apparently taking
pity on her, she had arranged it so that Caterina could leave the convent for
the evening, and meet up with Casanova. Only a few months before
Casanova had been in love with this girl, but he had forgotten about her.
Compared to the ingenious Mathilde, Caterina was a simpering bore. He
could not conceal his disappointment. He burned to see Mathilde.
Casanova was angry at the trick Mathilde had played. But a few days
later, when he saw her again, all was forgiven. As she had predicted during
their first interview, her power over him was complete. He had become her
slave, addicted to her whims, and to the dangerous pleasures she offered.
Who knows what rash act he might have committed on her behalf had
their affair not been cut short by circumstance.
Interpretation. Casanova was almost always in control in his seductions.
He was the one who led, taking his victim on a trip to an unknown desti-
nation, luring her into his web. In all of his memoirs the story of Mathilde
is the only seduction in which the tables are happily turned: he is the se-
duced, the bewildered victim.
What made Casanova Mathilde's slave was the same tactic he had used
on countless girls: the irresistible lure of being led by another person, the
thrill of being surprised, the power of mystery. Each time he left Mathilde
his head was spinning with questions. Her ability to go on surprising him
kept her always in his mind, deepening her spell and blotting Caterina out.
Each surprise was carefully calculated for the effect it would produce. The
first unexpected letter piqued his curiosity, as did that first sight of her in
the waiting room; suddenly seeing her dressed as an elegant woman stirred
intense desire; then seeing her dressed as a man intensified the excitingly
transgressive nature of their liaison. The surprises put him off balance, yet
left him quivering with anticipation of the next one. Even an unpleasant
surprise, such as the encounter with Caterina that Mathilde had set up, kept
him emotional and weak. Meeting the somewhat bland Caterina at that
moment only made him long that much more for Mathilde.
In seduction, you need to create constant tension and suspense, a feel-
ing that with you nothing is predictable. Do not think of this as a painful
challenge. You are creating drama in real life, so pour your creative energies
into it, have some fun. There are all kinds of calculated surprises you can
spring on your victims—sending a letter from out of the blue, showing up
unexpectedly, taking them to a place they have never been. But best of all
are surprises that reveal something new about your character. This needs to
be set up. In those first few weeks, your targets will tend to make certain
snap judgments about you, based on appearances. Perhaps they see you as
a bit shy, practical, puritanical. You know that this is not the real you, but it
is how you act in social situations. Let them, however, have these impres-
sions, and in fact accentuate them a little, without overacting: for instance,Shahzaman related to [his
brother King Shahriyar] all
that he had seen in the
king's garden that day. . . .
• Upon this Shahriyar
announced his intention to
set forth on another
expedition. The troops
went out of the city with
the tents, and King
Shahriyar followed them.
And after he had stayed a
while in the camp, he gave
orders to his slaves that no
one was to be admitted to
the king's tent. He then
disguised himself and
returned unnoticed to the
palace, where his brother
was waiting for him. They
both sat at one of the
windows overlooking the
garden; and when they had
been there a short time, the
queen and her women
appeared with the black
slaves, and behaved as
Shahzaman had
described. . . . • As soon
as they entered the palace,
King Shahriyar put his
wife to death, together with
her women and the black
slaves. Thenceforth he
made it his custom to take
a virgin in marriage to his
bed each night, and kill her
the next morning. This he
continued to do for three
years, until a clamor rose
among the people, some of
whom fled the country with
their daughters. • Now the
vizier had two daughters.
The elder was called
Shahrazad, and the
younger Dunyazad.
Shahrazad possessed many
accomplishments and was
versed in the wisdom of the
poets and the legends of
ancient kings. • That day
Shahrazad noticed her
father's anxiety and asked
him what it was that
troubled him. When the
vizier told her of his
predicament, she said:
"Give me in marriage to
