Insinuating Desire
One evening in the 1770s, a young man went to the Paris Opera to
meet his lover, the Countess de . The couple had been fighting,
and he was anxious to see her again. The countess had not arrived yet at
her box, but from an adjacent one a friend of hers, Madame de T ,
called out to the young man to join her, remarking that it was an excellent
stroke of luck that they had met that evening—he must keep her company
on a trip she had to take. The young man wanted urgently to see the
countess, but Madame was charming and insistent and he agreed to go with
her. Before he could ask why or where, she quickly escorted him to her
carriage outside, which then sped off.
Now the young man enjoined his hostess to tell him where she was
taking him. At first she just laughed, but finally she told him: to her hus-
band's château. The couple had been estranged, but had decided to recon-
cile; her husband was a bore, however, and she felt a charming young man
like himself would liven things up. The young man was intrigued: Madame
was an older woman, with a reputation for being rather formal, though he
also knew she had a lover, a marquis. Why had she chosen him for this ex-
cursion? Her story was not quite credible. Then, as they traveled, she sug-
gested he look out the window at the passing landscape, as she was doing.
He had to lean over toward her to do so, and just as he did, the carriage
jolted. She grabbed his hand and fell into his arms. She stayed there for a
moment, then pulled away from him rather abruptly. After an awkward si-
lence, she said, "Do you intend to convince me of my imprudence in your
regard?" He protested that the incident had been an accident and reassured
her he would behave himself. In truth, however, having her in his arms had
made him think otherwise.
They arrived at the château. The husband came to meet them, and the
young man expressed his admiration of the building: "What you see is
nothing," Madame interrupted, "I must take you to Monsieur's apartment."
Before he could ask what she meant, the subject was quickly changed. The
husband was indeed a bore, but he excused himself after supper. Now
Madame and the young man were alone. She invited him to walk with her
in the gardens; it was a splendid evening, and as they walked, she slipped
her arm in his. She was not worried that he would take advantage of her,
she said, because she knew how attached he was to her good friend the
countess. They talked of other things, and then she returned to the topic ofAs we were about to enter
the chamber, she stopped
me. "Remember," she said
gravely, "you are supposed
never to have seen, never
even suspected, the
sanctuary you're about to
enter. . . ." • . . . All this
was like an initiation rite.
She led me by the hand
across a small, dark
corridor. My heart was
pounding as though I were
a young proselyte being put
to the test before the
celebration oj the great
mysteries. . . . • "But
your Countess ..." she
said, stopping. I was about
to reply when the doors
opened; my answer was
interrupted by admiration.
I was astonished,
delighted, I no longer
know what became of me,
and I began in good faith
to believe in magic. . . . In
truth, I found myself in a
vast cage of mirrors on
which images were so
artistically painted that
they produced the illusion
of all the objects they
represented.
—VIVANT DENON,"NO
TOMORROW," IN MICHEL FEHER,
ED., THE LIBERTINE READER
213
214 • The Art of Seduction
his lover: "Is she making you quite happy? Oh, I fear the contrary, and this
distresses me. . . . Are you not often the victim of her strange whims?" To
the young man's surprise, Madame began to talk of the countess in a way
that made it seem that she had been unfaithful to him (which was some-
thing he had suspected). Madame sighed—she regretted saying such things
about her friend, and asked him to forgive her; then, as if a new thought
had occurred to her, she mentioned a nearby pavilion, a delightful place,
full of pleasant memories. But the shame of it was, it was locked and she
had no key. And yet they found their way to the pavilion, and lo and be-
hold, the door had been left open. It was dark inside, but the young man
could sense that it was a place for trysts. They entered and sank onto a sofa,
and before he knew what had come over him, he took her in his arms.
Madame seemed to push him away, but then gave in. Finally she came to
her senses: they must return to the house. Had he gone too far? He must
try to control himself.
As they strolled back to the house, Madame remarked, "What a deli-
cious night we've just spent." Was she referring to what had happened in
the pavilion? "There is an even more charming room in the château," she
went on, "but I can't show you anything," implying he had been too for-
ward. She had mentioned this room ("Monsieur's apartment") several times
before; he could not imagine what could be so interesting about it, but by
now he was dying to see it and insisted she show it to him. "If you promise
to be good," she replied, her eyes widening. Through the darkness of the
house she led him into the room, which, to his delight, was a kind of tem-
ple of pleasure: there were mirrors on the walls, trompe l'oeil paintings
evoking a forest scene, even a dark grotto, and a garlanded statue of Eros.
Overwhelmed by the mood of the place, the young man quickly resumed
what he had started in the pavilion, and would have lost all track of time
if a servant had not rushed in and warned them that it was getting light
outside—Monsieur would soon be up.
They quickly separated. Later that day, as the young man prepared to
leave, his hostess said, "Goodbye, Monsieur; I owe you so many pleasures;
but I have paid you with a beautiful dream. Now your love summons you
to return. . . . Don't give the Countess cause to quarrel with me." Reflect-
ing on his experience on the way back, he could not figure out what it
meant. He had the vague sensation of having been used, but the pleasures
he remembered outweighed his doubts.
Interpretation. Madame de T is a character in the eighteenth-century
libertine short story "No Tomorrow," by Vivant Denon. The young man is
the story's narrator. Although fictional, Madame's techniques were clearly
based on those of several well-known libertines of the time, masters of
the game of seduction. And the most dangerous of their weapons was
insinuation—the means by which Madame cast her spell on the young man,
making him seem the aggressor, giving her the night of pleasure she desired,A few short years ago, in
our native city, where fraud
and cunning prosper more
than love or loyalty, there
was a noblewoman of
striking beauty and
impeccable breeding, who
was endowed by Nature
with as lofty a
temperament and shrewd
an intellect as could be
found in any other woman
of her time. . . . • This
lady, being of gentle birth
and finding herself married
off to a master woollen-
draper because he happened
to be very rich, was unable
to stifle her heartfelt
contempt, for she was
firmly of the opinion that
no man of low condition,
however wealthy, was
deserving of a noble wife.
And on discovering that all
he was capable of despite
his massive wealth, was
distinguishing wool from
cotton, supervising the
setting up of a loom, or
debating the virtues of a
particular yarn with a
spinner-woman, she
resolved that as far as it lay
within her power she
would have nothing
whatsoever to do with his
beastly caresses. Moreover
she was determined to seek
her pleasure elsewhere, in
the company of one who
seemed more worthy of her
affection, and so it was that
she fell deeply in love with
an extremely eligible man
in his middle thirties. And
whenever a day passed
without her having set eyes
upon him, she was restless
for the whole of the
following night. •
However, the gentleman
suspected nothing of all
this, and took no notice of
her; and for her part, being
very cautious, she would
not venture to declare her
love by dispatching a
maidservant or writing him
