Appendix B: Soft Seduction: How to Sell Anything to the Masses • 449
cigarettes in public, as if nothing were more natural. Photographers ap-
peared and took pictures of this novel sight. Usually at the Easter parade,
people would have been whispering about a new hat style or the new
spring color. This year everyone was talking about the daring young
women and their cigarettes. The next day, photographs and articles ap-
peared in the papers about them. A United Press dispatch read, "Just as
Miss Federica Freylinghusen, conspicuous in a tailored outfit of dark grey,
pushed her way thru the jam in front of St. Patrick's, Miss Bertha Hunt and
six colleagues struck another blow in behalf of the liberty of women.
Down Fifth Avenue they strolled, puffing at cigarettes. Miss Hunt issued
the following communique from the smoke-clouded battlefield: 'I hope
that we have started something and that these torches of freedom, with no
particular brand favored, will smash the discriminatory taboo on cigarettes
for women and that our sex will go on breaking down all discriminations.' "
The story was picked up by newspapers around the country, and soon
women in other cities began to light up in the streets. The controversy
raged for weeks, some papers decrying this new habit, others coming to the
women's defense. A few months later, though, public smoking by women
had become a socially acceptable practice. Few people bothered to protest
it anymore.
Interpretation. In January 1929, several New York debutantes received the
same telegram from a Miss Bertha Hunt: "In the interests of equality of the
sexes ... I and other young women will light another torch of freedom by
smoking cigarettes while strolling on Fifth Avenue Easter Sunday." The
debutantes who ended up participating met beforehand in the office where
Hunt worked as a secretary. They planned what churches to appear at, how
to link up with each other, all the details. Hunt handed out packs of Lucky
Strikes. Everything worked to perfection on the appointed day.
Little did the debutantes know, though, that the whole affair had been
masterminded by a man—Miss Hunt's boss, Edward Bernays, a public rela-
tions adviser to the American Tobacco Company, makers of Lucky Strike.
American Tobacco had been luring women into smoking with all kinds of
clever ads, but the consumption was limited by the fact that smoking in the
street was considered unladylike. The head of American Tobacco had asked
Bernays for his help and Mr. Bernays had obliged him by applying a tech-
nique that was to become his trademark: gain public attention by creating
an event that the media would cover as news. Orchestrate every detail but
make them seem spontaneous. As more people heard of this "event," it
would spark imitative behavior—in this case more women smoking in the
streets.
Bernays, a nephew of Sigmund Freud and perhaps the greatest public
relations genius of the twentieth century, understood a fundamental law of
any kind of sell. The moment the targets know you are after something—a
vote, a sale—they become resistant. But disguise your sales pitch as a news
450 • Appendix B: Soft Seduction: How to Sell Anything to the Masses
event and not only will you bypass their resistance, you can also create a so-
cial trend that does the selling for you. To make this work, the event you set
up must stand out from all the other events that are covered by the media,
yet it cannot stand out too far or it will seem contrived. In the case of the
Easter parade, Bernays (through Bertha Hunt) chose women who would
seem elegant and proper even with their cigarettes in their hands. Yet in
breaking a social taboo, and doing so as a group, such women would create
an image so dramatic and startling that the media would be unable to pass it
up. An event that is picked up by the news has the imprimatur of reality.
It is important to give this manufactured event positive associations, as
Bernays did in creating a feeling of rebellion, of women banding together.
Associations that are patriotic, say, or subtly sexual, or spiritual—anything
pleasant and seductive—take on a life of their own. Who can resist? People
essentially persuade themselves to join the crowd without even realizing
that a sale has taken place. The feeling of active participation is vital to se-
duction. No one wants to feel left out of a growing movement.
3. In the presidential campaign of 1984, President Ronald Reagan, run-
ning for reelection, told the public, "It's morning again in America." His
presidency, he claimed, had restored American pride. The recent, successful
Olympics in Los Angeles were symbolic of the country's return to strength
and confidence. Who could possibly want to turn the clock back to 1980,
which Reagan's predecessor, Jimmy Carter, had termed a time of malaise?
Reagan's Democratic challenger, Walter Mondale, thought Americans
had had enough of the Reagan soft touch. They were ready for honesty,
and that would be Mondale's appeal. Before a nationwide television audi-
ence, Mondale declared, "Let's tell the truth. Mr. Reagan will raise taxes,
and so will I. He won't tell you. I just did." He repeated this straightfor-
ward approach on numerous occasions. By October his poll numbers had
plunged to all-time lows.
The CBS News reporter Lesley Stahl had been covering the campaign,
and as Election Day neared, she had an uneasy feeling. It wasn't so much
that Reagan had focused on emotions and moods rather than hard issues. It
was more that the media was giving him a free ride; he and his election
team, she felt, were playing the press like a fiddle. They always managed to
get him photographed in the perfect setting, looking strong and presiden-
tial. They fed the press snappy headlines along with dramatic footage of
Reagan in action. They were putting on a great show.
Stahl decided to assemble a news piece that would show the public how
Reagan used television to cover up the negative effects of his policies. The
piece began with a montage of images that his team had orchestrated over
the years: Reagan relaxing on his ranch in jeans; standing tall at the Nor-
mandy invasion tribute in France; throwing a football with his Secret Ser-
vice bodyguards; sitting in an inner-city classroom. . . . Over these images
Stahl asked, "How does Ronald Reagan use television? Brilliantly. He's
