The Charismatic • 115
country full independence. Eleven days later, French generals in Algeria is-
sued a communique stating that they had taken over the country and de-
claring a state of siege. This was the most dangerous moment of all: faced
with Algeria's imminent independence, these right-wing generals would go
all the way. A civil war could break out, toppling de Gaulle's government.
The following night, de Gaulle appeared once again on television, once
again wearing his old uniform. He mocked the generals, comparing them
to a South American junta. He talked calmly and sternly. Then, suddenly,
at the very end of the address, his voice rose and even trembled as he called
out to the audience: "Françaises, Français, aidez-moi!" ("Frenchwomen,
Frenchmen, help me!") It was the most stirring moment of all his televi-
sion appearances. French soldiers in Algeria, listening on transistor radios,
were overwhelmed. The next day they held a mass demonstration in favor
of de Gaulle. Two days later the generals surrendered. On July 1, 1962, de
Gaulle proclaimed Algeria's independence.
In 1940, after the German invasion of France, de Gaulle escaped to En-
gland to recruit an army that would eventually return to France for the lib-
eration. At the beginning, he was alone, and his mission seemed hopeless.
But he had the support of Winston Churchill, and with Churchill's blessing
he gave a series of radio talks that the BBC broadcast to France. His
strange, hypnotic voice, with its dramatic tremolos, would enter French liv-
ing rooms in the evenings. Few of his listeners even knew what he looked
like, but his tone was so confident, so stirring, that he recruited a silent
army of believers. In person, de Gaulle was a strange, brooding man whose
confident manner could just as easily irritate as win over. But over the radio
that voice had intense charisma. De Gaulle was the first great master of
modern media, for he easily transferred his dramatic skills to television,
where his iciness, his calmness, his total self-possession, made audiences feel
both comforted and inspired.
The world has grown more fractured. A nation no longer conies to-
gether on the streets or in the squares; it is brought together in living
rooms, where people watching television all over the country can simulta-
neously be alone and with others. Charisma must now be communicable
over the airwaves or it has no power. But it is in some ways easier to project
on television, both because television makes a direct one-on-one appeal
(the Charismatic seems to address you) and because charisma is fairly easy to
fake for the few moments you spend in front of the camera. As de Gaulle
understood, when appearing on television it is best to radiate calmness and
control, to use dramatic effects sparingly. De Gaulle's overall iciness made
doubly effective the brief moments in which he raised his voice, or let
loose a biting joke. By remaining calm and underplaying it, he hypnotized
his audience. (Your face can express much more if your voice is less stri-
dent.) He conveyed emotion visually—the uniform, the setting—and
through the use of certain charged words: the liberation, Joan of Arc. The
less he strained for effect, the more sincere he appeared.
116 • The Art of Seduction
All this must be carefully orchestrated. Punctuate your calmness with
surprises; rise to a climax; keep things short and terse. The only thing that
cannot be faked is self-confidence, the key component to charisma since
the days of Moses. Should the camera lights betray your insecurity, all the
tricks in the world will not put your charisma back together again.
Symbol: The Lamp. Invisible to the eye, a current flowing
through a wire in a glass vessel generates a heat that
turns into candescence. All we see is the glow.
In the prevailing darkness, the Lamp
lights the way.
Dangers
On a pleasant May day in 1794, the citizens of Paris gathered in a park
for the Festival of the Supreme Being. The focus of their attention
was Maximilien de Robespierre, head of the Committee of Public Safety,
and the man who had thought up the festival in the first place. The idea was
simple: to combat atheism, "to recognize the existence of a Supreme Being
and the Immortality of the Soul as the guiding forces of the universe."
It was Robespierre's day of triumph. Standing before the masses in his
sky-blue suit and white stockings, he initiated the festivities. The crowd
adored him; after all, he had safeguarded the purposes of the French Revo-
lution through the intense politicking that had followed it. The year before,
he had initiated the Reign of Terror, which cleansed the revolution of its
enemies by sending them to the guillotine. He had also helped guide the
country through a war against the Austrians and the Prussians. What made
crowds, and particularly women, love him was his incorruptible virtue (he
lived very modestly), his refusal to compromise, the passion for the revolu-
tion that was evident in everything he did, and the romantic language of
his speeches, which could not fail to inspire. He was a god. The day was
beautiful and augured a great future for the revolution.
Two months later, on July 26, Robespierre delivered a speech that he
