The Dandy • 49
their disdain for convention: Théophile Gautier's red vest, Oscar Wilde's
green velvet suit, Andy Warhol's silver wigs. The great English Prime Min-
ister Benjamin Disraeli had two magnificent canes, one for morning, one
for evening; at noon he would change canes, no matter where he was. The
female Dandy works similarly. She may adopt male clothing, say, but if she
does, a touch here or there will set her truly apart: no man ever dressed
quite like George Sand. The overtall hat, the riding boots worn on the
streets of Paris, made her a sight to behold.
Remember, there must be a reference point. If your visual style is to-
tally unfamiliar, people will think you at best an obvious attention-getter, at
worst crazy. Instead, create your own fashion sense by adapting and altering
prevailing styles to make yourself an object of fascination. Do this right and
you will be wildly imitated. The Count d'Orsay, a great London dandy of
the 1830s and 1840s, was closely watched by fashionable people; one day,
caught in a sudden London rainstorm, he bought a paltrok, a kind of heavy,
hooded duffle coat, off the back of a Dutch sailor. The paltrok immediately
became the coat to wear. Having people imitate you, of course, is a sign of
your powers of seduction.
The nonconformity of Dandies, however, goes far beyond appearances.
It is an attitude toward life that sets them apart; adopt that attitude and a
circle of followers will form around you.
Dandies are supremely impudent. They don't give a damn about other
people, and never try to please. In the court of Louis XIV, the writer La
Bruyere noticed that courtiers who tried hard to please were invariably on
the way down; nothing was more anti-seductive. As Barbey d'Aurevilly
wrote, "Dandies please women by displeasing them."
Impudence was fundamental to the appeal of Oscar Wilde. In a Lon-
don theater one night, after the first performance of one of Wilde's plays,
the ecstatic audience yelled for the author to appear onstage. Wilde made
them wait and wait, then finally emerged, smoking a cigarette and wearing
an expression of total disdain. "It may be bad manners to appear here
smoking, but it is far worse to disturb me when I am smoking," he scolded
his fans. The Count d'Orsay was equally impudent. At a London club one
night, a Rothschild who was notoriously cheap accidentally dropped a gold
coin on the floor, then bent down to look for it. The count immediately
whipped out a thousand-franc note (worth much more than the coin),
rolled it up, lit it like a candle, and got down on all fours, as if to help light
the way in the search. Only a Dandy could get away with such audacity.
The insolence of the Rake is tied up with his desire to conquer a woman;
he cares for nothing else. The insolence of the Dandy, on the other hand, is
aimed at society and its conventions. It is not a woman he cares to conquer
but a whole group, an entire social world. And since people are generally
oppressed by the obligation of always being polite and self-sacrificing, they
are delighted to spend time around a person who disdains such niceties.
Dandies are masters of the art of living. They live for pleasure, not for
work; they surround themselves with beautiful objects and eat and drinkSometimes, however, the
tyranny of elegance became
altogether insupportable. A
Mr. Boothby committed
suicide and left a note
saying he could no longer
endure the ennui of
buttoning and unbuttoning.
—THE GAME OF HEARTS:
HARRIETTE WILSON'S
MEMOIRS, EDITED BY LESLEY
BLANCH
This royal manner which
[the dandy] raises to the
height of true royalty, the
dandy has taken this from
women, who alone seem
naturally made for such a
role. It is a somewhat by
using the manner and the
method of women that
the dandy dominates. And
this usurpation of
femininity, he makes
women themselves approve
of this. . . . The dandy
has something antinatural
and androgynous about
him, which is precisely how
he is able to endlessly
seduce.
—JULES LEMAÎTRE,
LES CONTEMPORAINS
50 • The Art of Seduction
with the same relish they show for their clothes. This was how the great
Roman writer Petronius, author of the Satyricon, was able to seduce the
emperor Nero. Unlike the dull Seneca, the great Stoic thinker and Nero's
tutor, Petronius knew how to make every detail of life a grand aesthetic ad-
venture, from a feast to a simple conversation. This is not an attitude you
should impose on those around you—you can't make yourself a nuisance—
but if you simply seem socially confident and sure of your taste, people will
be drawn to you. The key is to make everything an aesthetic choice. Your
ability to alleviate boredom by making life an art will make your company
highly prized.
The opposite sex is a strange country we can never know, and this ex-
cites us, creates the proper sexual tension. But it is also a source of annoy-
ance and frustration. Men do not understand how women think, and vice
versa; each tries to make the other act more like a member of their own
sex. Dandies may never try to please, but in this one area they have a pleas-
ing effect: by adopting psychological traits of the opposite sex, they appeal
to our inherent narcissism. Women identified with Rudolph Valentino's
delicacy and attention to detail in courtship; men identified with Lou
Andreas-Salomé's lack of interest in commitment. In the Heian court of
eleventh-century Japan, Sei Shonagon, the writer of The Pillow Book, was
powerfully seductive for men, especially literary types. She was fiercely in-
dependent, wrote poetry with the best, and had a certain emotional dis-
tance. Men wanted more from her than just to be her friend or companion,
as if she were another man; charmed by her empathy for male psychology,
they fell in love with her. This kind of mental transvestism—the ability to
enter the spirit of the opposite sex, adapt to their way of thinking, mirror
their tastes and attitudes—can be a key element in seduction. It is a way of
mesmerizing your victim.
According to Freud, the human libido is essentially bisexual; most peo-
ple are in some way attracted to people of their own sex, but social con-
straints (varying with culture and historical period) repress these impulses.
The Dandy represents a release from such constraints. In several of Shake-
speare's plays, a young girl (back then, the female roles in the theater were
actually played by male actors) has to go into disguise and dresses up as a
boy, eliciting all kinds of sexual interest from men, who later are delighted
to find out that the boy is actually a girl. (Think, for example, of Rosalind
in As You Like It.) Entertainers such as Josephine Baker (known as the
Chocolate Dandy) and Marlene Dietrich would dress up as men in their acts,
making themselves wildly popular—among men. Meanwhile the slightly
feminized male, the pretty boy, has always been seductive to women. Valen-
tino embodied this quality. Elvis Presley had feminine features (the face, the
hips), wore frilly pink shirts and eye makeup, and attracted the attention of
women early on. The filmmaker Kenneth Anger said of Mick Jagger that it
was "a bisexual charm which constituted an important part of the attrac-
tion he had over young girls . . . and which acted upon their unconscious."
In Western culture for centuries, in fact, feminine beauty has been far more
