Appear to Be an Object of Desire—Create Triangles • 201
of creating an aura of desirability. Women threw themselves at Errol Flynn's
feet, not because of his handsome face, and certainly not because of his
acting skills, but because of his reputation. They knew that other women
had found him irresistible. Once he had established that reputation, he did
not have to chase women anymore; they came to him. Men who believe
that a rakish reputation will make women fear or distrust them, and should
be played down, are quite wrong. On the contrary, it makes them more at-
tractive. The virtuous Duchess de Montpensier, the Grande Mademoiselle of
seventeenth-century France, began by enjoying a friendship with the rake
Lauzun, but a troubling thought soon occurred to her: if a man with
Lauzun's past did not see her as a possible lover, something had to be wrong
with her. This anxiety eventually pushed her into his arms. To be part of a
great seducer's club of conquests can be a matter of vanity and pride. We
are happy to be in such company, to have our name broadcast as this man or
woman's lover. Your own reputation may not be so alluring, but you must
find a way to suggest to your victim that others, many others, have found
you desirable. It is reassuring. There is nothing like a restaurant full of
empty tables to persuade you not to go in.
A variation on the triangle strategy is the use of contrasts: careful ex-
ploitation of people who are dull or unattractive may enhance your desir-
ability by comparison. At a social affair, for instance, make sure that your
target has to chat with the most boring person available. Come to the res-
cue and your target will be delighted to see you. In The Seducer's Diary, by
Søren Kierkegaard, Johannes has designs on the innocent young Cordelia.
Knowing that his friend Edward is hopelessly shy and dull, he encourages
this man to court her; a few weeks of Edward's attentions will make her
eyes wander in search of someone else, anyone else, and Johannes will make
sure that they settle on him. Johannes chose to strategize and maneuver, but
almost any social environment will contain contrasts you can make use of
almost naturally. The seventeenth-century English actress Nell Gwyn be-
came the main mistress of King Charles II because her humor and unaffect-
edness made her that much more desirable among the many stiff and
pretentious ladies of Charles's court. When the Shanghai actress Jiang Qing
met Mao Zedong, in 1937, she did not have to do much to seduce him;
the other women in his mountain camp in Yenan dressed like men, and
were decidedly unfeminine. The sight alone of Jiang was enough to seduce
Mao, who soon left his wife for her. To make use of contrasts, either de-
velop and display those attractive attributes (humor, vivacity, and so on) that
are the scarcest in your own social group, or choose a group in which your
natural qualities are rare, and will shine.
The use of contrasts has vast political ramifications, for a political figure
must also seduce and seem desirable. Learn to play up the qualities that your
rivals lack. Peter II, czar in eighteenth-century Russia, was arrogant and ir-
responsible, so his wife, Catherine the Great, did all she could to seem
modest and dependable. When Vladimir Lenin returned to Russia in 1917
after Czar Nicholas II had been deposed, he made a show of decisivenessIt's annoying that our new
acquaintance likes the boy.
But aren't the best things
in life free to all? The sun
shines on everyone. The
moon, accompanied by
countless stars, leads even
the beasts to pasture. What
can you think of lovelier
than water? But it flows
for the whole world. Is love
alone then something
furtive rather than
something to be gloried in?
Exactly, that's just it—I
don't want any of the good
things of life unless people
are envious of them.
—PETRONIUS, THE SATYRICON,
TRANSLATED BY J. P. SULLIVAN
202 • The Art of Seduction
and discipline—precisely what no other leader had at the time. In the
American presidential race of 1980, the irresoluteness of Jimmy Carter
made the single-mindedness of Ronald Reagan look desirable. Contrasts
are eminently seductive because they do not depend on your own words or
self-advertisements. The public reads them unconsciously, and sees what it
wants to see.
Finally, appearing to be desired by others will raise your value, but often
how you carry yourself can influence this as well. Do not let your targets
see you so often; keep your distance, seem unattainable, out of their reach.
An object that is rare and hard to obtain is generally more prized.
Symbol: The Trophy.
What makes you want to win the trophy, and to see it as
something worth having, is the sight of the other competitors. Some,
out of a spirit of kindness, may want to reward everyone for trying, but
the Trophy then loses its value. It must represent not only
your victory but everyone else's defeat.
Reversal
There is no reversal. It is essential to appear desirable in the eyes of
others.
