
The Erotic Regression
As adults we tend to overvalue our childhood. In their dependency and
powerlessness, children genuinely suffer, yet when we get older we
conveniently forget about that and sentimentalize the supposed paradise we
have left behind. We forget the pain and remember only the pleasure.
Why? Because the responsibilities of adult life are a burden so oppressive at
times that we secretly yearn for the dependency of childhood, for that per-
son who looked after our every need, assumed our cares and worries. This
daydream of ours has a strong erotic component, for the child's feeling of
being dependent on the parent is charged with sexual undertones. Give
people a sensation similar to that protected, dependent feeling of childhood
and they will project all kinds of fantasies onto you, including feelings of
love or sexual attraction that they will attribute to something else. We
won't admit it, but we long to regress, to shed our adult exterior and vent
the childish emotions that linger beneath the surface.
Early in his career, Sigmund Freud confronted a strange problem: many
of his female patients were falling in love with him. He thought he knew
what was happening: encouraged by Freud, the patient would delve into
her childhood, which of course was the source of her illness or neurosis.
She would talk about her relationship with her father, her earliest experi-
ences of tenderness and love, and also of neglect and abandonment. The
process would stir up powerful emotions and memories. In a way, she
would be transported back into her childhood. Intensifying this effect was
the fact that Freud himself said little and made himself a little cold and dis-
tant, although he seemed to be caring—in other words, quite like the tradi-
tional father figure. Meanwhile the patient was lying on a couch, in a
helpless or passive position, so that the situation duplicated the roles of par-
ent and child. Eventually she would begin to direct some of the confused
emotions she was dealing with toward Freud himself. Unaware of what was
happening, she would relate to him as to her father. She would regress and
fall in love. Freud called this phenomenon "transference," and it would be-
come an active part of his therapy. By getting patients to transfer some of
their repressed feelings onto the therapist, he would bring their problems
into the open, where they could be dealt with on a conscious level.
The transference effect was so potent, though, that Freud was often un-
able to move his patients past their infatuation. In fact transference is a
powerful way of creating an emotional attachment—the goal of any seduc-[In Japan,] much in the
traditional way of child-
rearing seems to foster
passive dependence. The
child is rarely left alone,
day or night, for it usually
sleeps with the mother.
When it goes out the child
is not pushed ahead in a
pram, to face the world
alone, but is tightly bound
to the mother's back in a
snug cocoon. When the
mother bows, the child does
too, so the social graces are
acquired automatically
while feeling the mother's
heartbeat. Thus emotional
security tends to depend
almost entirely on the
physical presence of the
mother. • . . . Children
learn that a show of
passive dependence is the
best way to get favors as
well as affection. There is a
verb for this in Japanese:
amaeru, translated in the
dictionary as "to presume
upon another's love; to
play the baby." According
to the psychiatrist Doi
Takeo this is the main key
to understanding the
Japanese personality. It
goes on in adult life too:
juniors do it to seniors in
companies, or any other
group, women do it to
men, men do it to their
335
