116 • The Art of Seduction
All this must be carefully orchestrated. Punctuate your calmness with
surprises; rise to a climax; keep things short and terse. The only thing that
cannot be faked is self-confidence, the key component to charisma since
the days of Moses. Should the camera lights betray your insecurity, all the
tricks in the world will not put your charisma back together again.
Symbol: The Lamp. Invisible to the eye, a current flowing
through a wire in a glass vessel generates a heat that
turns into candescence. All we see is the glow.
In the prevailing darkness, the Lamp
lights the way.
Dangers
On a pleasant May day in 1794, the citizens of Paris gathered in a park
for the Festival of the Supreme Being. The focus of their attention
was Maximilien de Robespierre, head of the Committee of Public Safety,
and the man who had thought up the festival in the first place. The idea was
simple: to combat atheism, "to recognize the existence of a Supreme Being
and the Immortality of the Soul as the guiding forces of the universe."
It was Robespierre's day of triumph. Standing before the masses in his
sky-blue suit and white stockings, he initiated the festivities. The crowd
adored him; after all, he had safeguarded the purposes of the French Revo-
lution through the intense politicking that had followed it. The year before,
he had initiated the Reign of Terror, which cleansed the revolution of its
enemies by sending them to the guillotine. He had also helped guide the
country through a war against the Austrians and the Prussians. What made
crowds, and particularly women, love him was his incorruptible virtue (he
lived very modestly), his refusal to compromise, the passion for the revolu-
tion that was evident in everything he did, and the romantic language of
his speeches, which could not fail to inspire. He was a god. The day was
beautiful and augured a great future for the revolution.
Two months later, on July 26, Robespierre delivered a speech that he
The Charismatic • 117
thought would ensure his place in history, for he intended to hint at the
end of the Terror and a new era for France. Rumor also had it that he was
to call for a last handful of people to be sent to the guillotine, a final group
that threatened the safety of the revolution. Mounting the rostrum to ad-
dress the country's governing convention, Robespierre wore the same
clothes he had worn on the day of the festival. The speech was long, almost
three hours, and included an impassioned description of the values and
virtues he had helped protect. There was also talk of conspiracies, treach-
ery, unnamed enemies.
The response was enthusiastic, but a little less so than usual. The speech
had tired many representatives. Then a lone voice was heard, that of a man
named Bourdon, who spoke against printing Robespierre's speech, a veiled
sign of disapproval. Suddenly others stood up on all sides, and accused him
of vagueness: he had talked of conspiracies and threats without naming the
guilty. Asked to be specific, he refused, preferring to name names later on.
The next day Robespierre stood to defend his speech, and the representa-
tives shouted him down. A few hours later, he was the one sent to the guil-
lotine. On July 28, amid a gathering of citizens who seemed to be in an
even more festive mood than at the Festival of the Supreme Being, Robe-
spierre's head fell into the basket, to resounding cheers. The Reign of Ter-
ror was over.
Many of those who seemed to admire Robespierre actually harbored a
gnawing resentment of him—he was so virtuous, so superior, it was oppres-
sive. Some of these men had plotted against him, and were waiting for the
slightest sign of weakness—which appeared on that fateful day when he
gave his last speech. In refusing to name his enemies, he had shown either a
desire to end the bloodshed or a fear that they would strike at him before
he could have them killed. Fed by the conspirators, this one spark turned
into fire. Within two days, first a governing body and then a nation turned
against a Charismatic who two months before had been revered.
Charisma is as volatile as the emotions it stirs. Most often it stirs senti-
ments of love. But such feelings are hard to maintain. Psychologists talk of
"erotic fatigue"—the moments after love in which you feel tired of it, re-
sentful. Reality creeps in, love turns to hate. Erotic fatigue is a threat to all
Charismatics. The Charismatic often wins love by acting the savior, rescu-
ing people from some difficult circumstance, but once they feel secure,
charisma is less seductive to them. Charismatics need danger and risk. They
are not plodding bureaucrats; some of them deliberately keep danger go-
ing, as de Gaulle and Kennedy were wont to do, or as Robespierre did
through the Reign of Terror. But people tire of this, and at your first sign
of weakness they turn on you. The love they showed before will be
matched by their hatred now.
The only defense is to master your charisma. Your passion, your anger,
your confidence make you charismatic, but too much charisma for too
long creates fatigue, and a desire for calmness and order. The better kind of
