Prove Yourself • 325
Grammont knocked at the door, and a servant, mistaking him for the
duke, let him in. He headed straight for the lady's chamber, where he found
her lying on a couch, in a sheer gown. He threw off Brissac's cloak and she
gasped in fright. "What is the matter, my fair one?" he asked. "Your
headache, to all appearance, is gone?" She seemed put out, exclaimed she
still had the headache, and insisted that he leave. It was up to her, she said,
to make or break appointments. "Madam," Grammont said calmly, "I know
what perplexes you: you are afraid lest Brissac should meet me here; but
you may make yourself easy on that account." He then opened the window
and revealed Brissac out in the square, dutifully walking back and forth
with a horse, like a common stable boy. He looked ridiculous; de l'Orme
burst out laughing, threw her arms around the count, and exclaimed, "My
dear Chevalier, I can hold out no longer; you are too amiable and too ec-
centric not to be pardoned." He told her the whole story, and she promised
that the duke could exercise horses all night, but she would not let him in.
They made an appointment for the following evening. Outside, the count
returned the cloak, apologized for taking so long, and thanked the duke.
Brissac was most gracious, even holding Grammont's horse for him to
mount, and waving goodbye as he rode off.
Interpretation. Count Grammont knew that most would-be seducers give
up too easily, mistaking capriciousness or apparent coolness as a sign of a
genuine lack of interest. In fact it can mean many things: perhaps the per-
son is testing you, wondering if you are really serious. Prickly behavior is
exactly this kind of test—if you give up at the first sign of difficulty, you
obviously do not want them that much. Or it could be that they themselves
are uncertain about you, or are trying to choose between you and someone
else. In any event, it is absurd to give up. One incontrovertible demonstra-
tion of how far you are willing to go will overwhelm all doubts. It will also
defeat your rivals, since most people are timid, worried about making fools
of themselves, and so rarely risk anything.
When dealing with difficult or resistant targets, it is usually best to im-
provise, the way Grammont did. If your action seems sudden and a sur-
prise, it will make them more emotional, loosen them up. A little
roundabout accumulation of information—a little spying—is always a
good idea. Most important is the spirit in which you enact your proof. If
you are lighthearted and playful, if you make the target laugh, proving
yourself and amusing them at the same time, it won't matter if you mess
up, or if they see you have employed a little trickery. They will give in to
the pleasant mood you have created. Notice that the count never whined
or grew angry or defensive. All he had to do was pull back the curtain and
reveal the duke walking his horse, melting de l'Orme's resistance with
laughter. In one well-executed act, he showed what he would do for a
night of her favors.began to cry and to run in
the direction of her house,
where upon arriving, she
fainted. As soon as she
could speak, she ordered
that someone go and see
what had happened to
Saint-Preuil, who in truth
had not stayed very long in
the canal, and having
quickly put his clothes back
on, hurried to Paris where
he hid himself for several
days. Meanwhile, the
rumor spread that he had
died. Madame de la
Maisnnfort was deeply
moved by the extreme
measures he had adopted
to prove his sentiments.
This act of his appeared to
her to be a sign of an
extraordinary love; and
having perhaps noticed
some charms in his naked
presence that she had not
seen fully clothed, she
deeply regretted her cruelty,
and publicly stated her
feeling of loss. Word of this
reached Saint-Preuil, and
he immediately resurrected
himself and did not lose
time in taking advantage of
such a favorable feeling in
his mistress.
—COUNT BUSSY-RABUTIN,
HISTOIRES AMOUREUSES DES
GAULES
To become a lady's
vassal . . . the troubadour
was expected to pass
through four stages, i.e.:
aspirant, supplicant,
postulant, and lover.
When he had attained the
last stage of amorous
initiation he made a vow of
fidelity and this homage
was sealed by a kiss. • In
this idealistic form of
courtly love reserved for the
aristocratic elite of chivalry,
the phenomenon of love
was considered to be a state
326 • The Art of Seduction
2. Pauline Bonaparte, the sister of Napoleon, had so many affairs with dif-
ferent men over the years that doctors were afraid for her health. She could
not stay with one man for more than a few weeks; novelty was her only
pleasure. After Napoleon married her off to Prince Camillo Borghese, in
1803, her affairs only multiplied. And so, when she met the dashing Major
Jules de Canouville, in 1810, everyone assumed the affair would last no
longer than the others. Of course the major was a decorated soldier, well
educated, an accomplished dancer, and one of the most handsome men in
the army. But Pauline, thirty years old at the time, had had affairs with
dozens of men who could have matched that resume.
A few days after the affair began, the imperial dentist arrived chez
Pauline. A toothache had been causing her sleepless nights, and the dentist
saw he would have to pull out the bad tooth right then and there. No
painkillers were used at the time, and as the man began to take out his vari-
ous instruments, Pauline grew terrified. Despite the pain of the tooth, she
changed her mind and refused to have it pulled.
Major Canouville was lounging on a couch in a silken robe. Taking all
this in, he tried to encourage her to have it done: "A moment or two of
pain and it's over forever. ... A child could go through with it and not ut-
ter a sound." "I'd like to see you do it," she said. Canouville got up, went
over to the dentist, chose a tooth in the back of his own mouth, and or-
dered that it be pulled. A perfectly good tooth was extracted, and Canou-
ville barely batted an eyelash. After this, not only did Pauline let the dentist
do his job, her opinion of Canouville changed: no man had ever done any-
thing like this for her before.
The affair had been going to last but a few weeks; now it stretched on.
Napoleon was not pleased. Pauline was a married woman; short affairs
were allowed, but a deep attachment was embarrassing. He sent Canouville
to Spain, to deliver a message to a general there. The mission would take
weeks, and in the meantime Pauline would find someone else.
Canouville, though, was not your average lover. Riding day and night,
without stopping to eat or sleep, he arrived in Salamanca within a few days.
There he found that he could proceed no farther, since communications
had been cut off, and so, without waiting for further orders, he rode back
to Paris, without an escort, through enemy territory. He could meet with
Pauline only briefly; Napoleon sent him right back to Spain. It was months
before he was finally allowed to return, but when he did, Pauline immedi-
ately resumed her affair with him—an unheard-of act of loyalty on her
part. This time Napoleon sent Canouville to Germany and finally to Rus-
sia, where he died bravely in battle in 1812. He was the only lover Pauline
ever waited for, and the only one she ever mourned.
Interpretation. In seduction, the time often comes when the target has be-
gun to fall for you, but suddenly pulls back. Your motives have begun toof grace, while the
initiation that followed,
and the final sealing of the
pact—or equivalent of
the knightly accolade—
were linked with the rest of
a nobleman's training and
valorous exploits. The
hallmarks of a true lover
and of a perfect knight
were almost identical. The
lover was bound to serve
and obey his lady as a
knight served his lord. In
both cases the pledge was of
a sacred nature.
—NINA EPTON,
LOVE AND THE FRENCH
In one of the goodly towns
of the kingdom of France
there dwelt a nobleman of
good birth, who attended
the schools that he might
learn how virtue and honor
are to be acquired among
virtuous men. But
although he was so
accomplished that at the
age of seventeen or eighteen
years he was, as it were,
both precept and example
to others, Love failed not to
add his lesson to the rest;
and, that he might be the
better harkened to and
received, concealed himself
in the face and the eyes of
the fairest lady in the
whole country round, who
had come to the city in
order to advance a suit-at-
law. But before Love
sought to vanquish the
gentleman by means of this
lady's beauty, he had first
won her heart by letting
her see the perfections of
this young lord; for in good
looks, grace, sense and
excellence of speech he was
surpassed by none. • You,
who know what speedy
way is made by the fire of
love when once it fastens
on the heart and fancy, will
