352 • The Art of Seduction
heels, as it seemed he disdained everything, including his success. Soon he
was visiting Lady Caroline daily. He lingered in her boudoir, played with
her children, helped her choose her dress for the day. She pressed him to
talk of his life: he described his brutal father, the untimely deaths that
seemed to be a family curse, the crumbling abbey he had inherited, his ad-
ventures in Turkey and Greece. His life was indeed as gothic as that of
Childe Harold.
Within days the two became lovers. Now, though, the tables turned:
Lady Caroline pursued Byron with unladylike aggression. She dressed as a
page and sneaked into his carriage, wrote him extravagantly emotional let-
ters, flaunted the affair. At last, a chance to play the grand romantic role of
her girlhood fantasies. Byron began to turn against her. He already loved to
shock; now he confessed to her the nature of the secret sin he had alluded
to in Childe Harold—his homosexual affairs during his travels. He made
cruel remarks, grew indifferent. But this only seemed to push her further.
She sent him the customary lock of hair, but from her pubis; she followed
him in the street, made public scenes—finally her family sent her abroad to
avoid further scandal. After Byron made it clear the affair was over, she de-
scended into a madness that would last several years.
In 1813, an old friend of Byron's, James Webster, invited the poet to
stay at his country estate. Webster had a young and beautiful wife, Lady
Frances, and he knew Byron's reputation as a seducer, but his wife was
quiet and chaste—surely she would resist the temptation of a man such as
Byron. To Webster's relief, Byron barely spoke to Frances, who seemed
equally uninterested in him. Yet several days into Byron's stay, she contrived
to be alone with him in the billiards room, where she asked him a question:
how could a woman who liked a man inform him of it when he did not
perceive it? Byron scribbled a racy reply on a piece of paper, which made
her blush as she read it. Soon thereafter he invited the couple to stay with
him at his infamous abbey. There, the prim and proper Lady Frances saw
him drink wine from a human skull. They stayed up late in one of the
abbey's secret chambers, reading poetry and kissing. With Byron, it seemed,
Lady Frances was only too eager to explore adultery.
That same year, Lord Byron's half sister Augusta arrived in London to
get away from her husband, who was having money troubles. Byron had
not seen Augusta for some time. The two were physically similar—the
same face, the same mannerisms; she was Lord Byron as a woman. And his
behavior toward her was more than brotherly. He took her to the theater,
to dances, received her at home, treating her with an intimate spirit that
Augusta soon returned. Indeed the kind and tender attention that Byron
showered on her soon became physical.
Augusta was a devoted wife with three children, yet she yielded to her
half brother's advances. How could she help herself? He stirred up a strange
passion in her, a stronger passion than she felt for any other man, including
her husband. For Byron, his relationship with Augusta was the ultimate and
crowning sin of his career. And soon he was writing to his friends, openlyWe eternally chafe at
restrictions, covet \
Whatever's forbidden.
(Look how a sick man
who's told \ No immersion
hangs round the bath-
house.) \ . . . Desire \
Mounts for what's kept out
of reach. A thief's attracted
\ By burglar-proof
premises. How often will
love \ Thrive on a rival's
approval? It's not your
wife's beauty, but your own
\ Passion for her that gets
us—she must \ Have
something, just to have
hooked you. A girl locked
up by her \ Husband's not
chaste but pursued, her
fear's \ A bigger draw than
her figure. Illicit passion—
like it \ Or not—is
sweeter. It only turns me
on \ When the girl says,
"I'm frightened."
—OVID, THE AMORES,
TRANSLATED BY PETER GREEN
It is often not possible for
[women] later on to undo
the connection thus formed
in their minds between
sensual activities and
something forbidden, and
they turn out to be
psychically impotent, i.e.
frigid, when at last such
activities do become
permissible. This is the
source of the desire in so
many women to keep even
legitimate relations secret
for a time; and of the
appearance of the capacity
for normal sensation in
others as soon as the
condition of prohibition is
restored by a secret
intrigue—untrue to the
husband, they can keep a
second order of faith with
the lover. • In my opinion
the necessary condition of
forbiddenness in the erotic
life of women holds the
same place as the man's
Stir Up the Transgressive and Taboo • 353
confessing it. Indeed he delighted in their shocked responses, and his long
narrative poem, The Bride of Abydos, takes brother-sister incest as its theme.
Rumors began to spread of Byron's relations with Augusta, who was now
pregnant with his child. Polite society shunned him—but women were
more drawn to him than before, and his books were more popular than
ever.
Annabella Milbanke, Lady Caroline Lamb's cousin, had met Byron in
those first months of 1812 when he was the toast of London. Annabella
was sober and down to earth, and her interests were science and religion.
But there was something about Byron that attracted her. And the feeling
seemed to be returned: not only did the two become friends, to her bewil-
derment he showed another kind of interest in her, even at one point
proposing marriage. This was in the midst of the scandal over Byron and
Caroline Lamb, and Annabella did not take the proposal seriously. Over the
next few months she followed his career from a distance, and heard the
troubling rumors of incest. Yet in 1813, she wrote her aunt, "I consider his
acquaintance as so desirable that I would incur the risk of being called a
Flirt for the sake of enjoying it." Reading his new poems, she wrote that his
"description of Love almost makes me in love." She was developing an ob-
session with Byron, of which word soon reached him. They renewed their
friendship, and in 1814 he proposed again; this time she accepted. Byron
was a fallen angel and she would be the one to reform him.
It did not turn out that way. Byron had hoped that married life would
calm him down, but after the ceremony he realized it was a mistake. He
told Annabella, "Now you will find that you have married a devil." Within
a few years the marriage fell apart.
In 1816, Byron left England, never to return. He traveled through Italy
for a while; everyone knew his story—the affairs, the incest, the cruelty to
his lovers. But wherever he went, Italian women, particularly married no-
blewomen, pursued him, making it clear in their own way how prepared
they were to be the next Byronic victim. In truth, the women had become
the aggressors. As Byron told the poet Shelley, "No one has been more car-
ried off than poor dear me—I've been ravished more often than anyone
since the Trojan war."
Interpretation. Women of Byron's time were longing to play a different
role than society allowed them. They were supposed to be the decent,
moralizing force in culture; only men had outlets for their darker impulses.
Underlying the social restrictions on women, perhaps, was a fear of the
more amoral and unbridled part of the female psyche.
Feeling repressed and restless, women of the time devoured gothic nov-
els and romances, stories in which women were adventurous, and had the
same capacity for good and evil as men. Books like these helped to trigger a
revolt, with women like Lady Caroline playing out a little of the fantasy life
they had had in their girlhood, where it had to some extent been permit-need to lower his sexual
object. . . . Women
belonging to the higher
levels of civilization do not
usually transgress the
prohibition against sexual
activities during the period
of waiting, and thus they
acquire this close association
between the forbidden and
the sexual. . . . • The
injurious results of the
deprivation of sexual
enjoyment at the beginning
manifest themselves in lack
of full satisfaction when
sexual desire is later given
free rein in marriage. But,
on the other hand,
unrestrained sexual liberty
from the beginning leads to
no better result. It is easy
to show that the value the
mind sets on erotic needs
instantly sinks as soon as
satisfaction becomes readily
obtainable. Some obstacle
is necessary to swell the
tide of the libido to its
height; and at all periods of
history, wherever natural
barriers in the way of
satisfaction have not
sufficed, mankind has
erected conventional ones in
order to be able to enjoy
love. This is true both of
individuals and of nations.
In times during which no
obstacles to sexual
satisfaction existed, such
as, maybe, during the
decline of the civilizations
of antiquity, love became
worthless, life became
empty, and strong reaction-
formations were necessary
before the indispensable
emotional value of love
could be recovered.
—SIGMUND FREUD,
"CONTRIBUTIONS TO THE
PSYCHOLOGY OF LOVE,"
SEXUALITY AND THE
PSYCHOLOGY OF LOVE,
TRANSLATED BY JOAN RIVIÈRE
