26 • The Art of Seduction
The Rake is an extreme personality. Impudent, sarcastic, and bitingly
witty, he cares nothing for what anyone thinks. Paradoxically, this only
makes him more seductive. In the courtlike atmosphere of studio-era Holly-
wood, when most of the actors behaved like dutiful sheep, the great Rake
Errol Flynn stood out in his insolence. He defied the studio chiefs, engaged
in the most extreme pranks, reveled in his reputation as Hollywood's
supreme seducer—all of which enhanced his popularity. The Rake needs a
backdrop of convention—a stultified court, a humdrum marriage, a con-
servative culture—to shine, to be appreciated for the breath of fresh air he
provides. Never worry about going too far: the Rake's essence is that he
goes further than anyone else.
When the Earl of Rochester, seventeenth-century England's most no-
torious Rake and poet, abducted Elizabeth Malet, one of the most sought-
after young ladies of the court, he was duly punished. But lo and behold, a
few years later young Elizabeth, though wooed by the most eligible bache-
lors in the country, chose Rochester to be her husband. In demonstrating
his audacious desire, he made himself stand out from the crowd.
Related to the Rake's extremism is the sense of danger, taboo, perhaps
even the hint of cruelty about him. This was the appeal of another poet
Rake, one of the greatest in history: Lord Byron. Byron disliked any kind
of convention, and happily played this up. When he had an affair with his
half sister, who bore a child by him, he made sure that all of England knew
about it. He could be uncommonly cruel, as he was to his wife. But all of
this only made him that much more desirable. Danger and taboo appeal to
a repressed side in women, who are supposed to represent a civilizing, mor-
alizing force in culture. Just as a man may fall victim to the Siren through
his desire to be free of his sense of masculine responsibility, a woman may
succumb to the Rake through her yearning to be free of the constraints of
virtue and decency. Indeed it is often the most virtuous woman who falls
most deeply in love with the Rake.
Among the Rake's most seductive qualities is his ability to make women
want to reform him. How many thought they would be the one to tame
Lord Byron; how many of Picasso's women thought they would finally be
the one with whom he would spend the rest of his life. You must exploit
this tendency to the fullest. When caught red-handed in rakishness, fall
back on your weakness—your desire to change, and your inability to do so.
With so many women at your feet, what can you do? You are the one who
is the victim. You need help. Women will jump at this opportunity; they
are uncommonly indulgent of the Rake, for he is such a pleasant, dashing
figure. The desire to reform him disguises the true nature of their desire,
the secret thrill they get from him. When President Bill Clinton was clearly
caught out as a Rake, it was women who rushed to his defense, finding
every possible excuse for him. The fact that the Rake is so devoted to
women, in his own strange way, makes him lovable and seductive to them.
Finally, a Rake's greatest asset is his reputation. Never downplay your
bad name, or seem to apologize for it. Instead, embrace it, enhance it. It is
The Rake • 27
what draws women to you. There are several things you must be known
for: your irresistible attractiveness to women; your uncontrollable devotion
to pleasure (this will make you seem weak, but also exciting to be around);
your disdain for convention; a rebellious streak that makes you seem dan-
gerous. This last element can be slightly hidden; on the surface, be polite
and civil, while letting it be known that behind the scenes you are incorri-
gible. Duke de Richelieu made his conquests as public as possible, exciting
other women's competitive desire to join the club of the seduced. It was by
reputation that Lord Byron attracted his willing victims. A woman may feel
ambivalent about President Clinton's reputation, but beneath that ambiva-
lence is an underlying interest. Do not leave your reputation to chance or
gossip; it is your life's artwork, and you must craft it, hone it, and display it
with the care of an artist.
Symbol: Fire.
The Rake burns with a desire that
enflames the woman he is seducing. It is
extreme, uncontrollable, and dangerous. The Rake may
end in hell, but the flames surrounding him often make
him seem that much more desirable to women.
