422 • The Art of Seduction
loved good clothes—and the room would be full of flowers; there would
be a piano in the corner. He would play some music. His playing, and his
elegant, nonchalant manner, would come across to the woman as pure the-
ater, a pleasant continuation of the performance she had just witnessed.
And when it was over, and Ellington had to leave town, he would give her
a thoughtful gift. He would make it seem that the only thing taking him
away from her was his touring. A few weeks later, the woman might hear a
new Ellington song on the radio, with lyrics suggesting that she had in-
spired it. If ever he passed through the area again, she would find a way to
be there, and Ellington would often renew the affair, if only for a night.
Sometime in the 1940s, two young women from Alabama came to
Chicago to attend a debutante ball. Ellington and his band were the enter-
tainment. He was the women's favorite musician, and after the show, they
asked him for an autograph. He was so charming and engaging that one of
the girls found herself asking what hotel he was staying at. He told them,
with a big grin. The girls switched hotels, and later that day they called up
Ellington and invited him to their room for a drink. He accepted. They
wore beautiful negligees that they had just bought. When Ellington ar-
rived, he acted completely naturally, as if the warm greeting they gave him
were completely usual. The three of them ended up in the bedroom, when
one of the young women had an idea: her mother adored Ellington. She
had to call her now and put Ellington on the phone. Not at all put out by
the suggestion, Ellington played along. For several minutes he talked to the
mother on the telephone, lavishing her with compliments on the charming
daughter she had raised, and telling her not to worry—he was taking good
care of the girl. The daughter got back on the phone and said, "We're fine
because we're with Mr. Ellington and he's such a perfect gentleman." As
soon as she hung up, the three of them resumed the naughtiness they had
started. To the two girls, it later seemed an innocent but unforgettable night
of pleasure.
Sometimes several of these far-flung mistresses would show up at the
same concert. Ellington would go up and kiss each of them four times (a
habit of his designed for just this dilemma). And each of the ladies would
assume she was the one with whom the kisses really mattered.
Interpretation. Duke Ellington had two passions: music and women. The
two were interrelated. His endless affairs were a constant inspiration for his
music; he also treated them as if they were theater, a work of art in them-
selves. When it came time to separate, he always managed it with a theatri-
cal touch. A clever remark and a gift would make it seem that for him the
affair was hardly over. Song lyrics referring to their night together would
keep up the aesthetic atmosphere long after he had left town. No wonder
women kept coming back for more. This was not a sexual affair, a tawdry
one-nighter, but a heightened moment in the woman's life. And his care-
free attitude made it impossible to feel guilty; thoughts of one's mother oradmiration, saying to
myself, "Oh, if only I
could bring some poet here
to show him this great
wonder!"—yet, after I had
been gazing at the scene
from morning until night,
the myriad islands began to
smell unpleasantly of
seaweed, the waves that
beat on Matsuyama Point
became obstreperous; before
I knew it I had let all the
cherry blossoms at
Shiogama scatter; in the
morning I overslept and
missed the dawn snow on
Mount Kinka; nor was I
much impressed by the
evening moon at Nagané
or Oshima; and in the end
I picked up a few white
and black pebbles on the
cove and became engrossed
in a game of Six Musashi
with some children.
—IHARA SAIKAKU, THE LIFE OF
AN AMOROUS WOMAN,
TRANSLATED BY IVAN MORRIS
Men despise women who
love too much and
unwisely.
—LUCIAN, DIALOGUES
OF THE COURTESANS,
TRANSLATED BY A.L.H.
I shall endeavor briefly to
outline to you how a love
when gained can be
deepened. They say it can
be increased in particular
by making it an infrequent
and difficult business for
lovers to set eyes on each
other, for the greater the
difficulty of offering and
receiving shared
consolations, the greater
become the desire for, and
feeling of love. Love also
grows if one of the lovers
shows anger to the other,
for a lover is at once sorely
afraid that a partner's
Beware the Aftereffects • 423
husband would not spoil the illusion. Ellington was never defensive or
apologetic about his appetite for women; it was his nature and never the
fault of the woman that he was unfaithful. And if he could not help his de-
sires, how could she hold him responsible? It was impossible to hold a
grudge against such a man or complain about his behavior.
Ellington was an Aesthetic Rake, a type whose obsession with women
can only be satisfied by endless variety. A normal man's tomcatting will
eventually land him in hot water, but the Aesthetic Rake rarely stirs up ugly
emotions. After he seduces a woman, there is neither an integration nor a
sacrifice. He keeps them hanging and hoping. The spell is not broken the
next day, because the Aesthetic Rake makes the separation a pleasant, even
elegant experience. The spell Ellington cast on a woman never went away.
The lesson is simple: keep the moments after the seduction and the
separation in the same key as before, heightened, aesthetic, and pleasant. If
you do not act guilty for your feckless behavior, it is hard for the other per-
son to feel angry or resentful. Seduction is a lighthearted game, in which
you invest all of your energy in the moment. The separation should be
lighthearted and stylish as well: it is work, travel, some dreaded responsi-
bility that calls you away. Create a memorable experience and then move
on, and your victim will most likely remember the delightful seduction,
not the separation. You will have made no enemies, and will have a lifelong
harem of lovers to whom you can always return when you feel so inclined.
4. In 1899, twenty-year-old Baroness Frieda von Richthofen married an
Englishman named Ernest Weekley, a professor at the University of Not-
tingham, and soon settled into the role of the professor's wife. Weekley
treated her well, but she grew bored with their quiet life and his tepid love-
making. On trips home to Germany she had a few love affairs, but this
wasn't what she wanted either, and so she returned to being faithful and
caring for their three children.
One day in 1912, a former student of Weekley's, David Herbert
Lawrence, paid a visit to the couple's house. A struggling writer, Lawrence
wanted the professor's professional advice. He was not home yet so Frieda
entertained him. She had never met such an intense young man. He talked
of his impoverished youth, his inability to understand women. And he lis-
tened attentively to her own complaints. He even scolded her for the bad
tea she had made him—somehow, even though she was a baroness, this ex-
cited her.
Lawrence returned for later visits, but now to see Frieda, not Weekley.
One day he confessed to her that he had fallen deeply in love with her. She
admitted to similar feelings, and proposed they find a trysting spot. Instead
Lawrence had a proposal of his own: Leave your husband tomorrow—leave
him for me. What about the children? Frieda asked. If the children are
more important than our love, Lawrence replied, then stay with them. But
if you don't run away with me within a few days, you will never see mewrath when roused may
harden indefinitely. Love
again experiences increase
when genuine jealousy
preoccupies one of the
lovers, for jealousy is called
the nurturer of love. In fact
even if the lover is
oppressed not by genuine
jealousy but by base
suspicion, love always
increases because of it, and
becomes more powerful by
its own strength.
—ANDREAS CAPELLANUS
ON LOVE, TRANSLATED
BY P. G. WALSH
You've seen the fire that
smolders \ Down to
nothing, grows a crown of
pale ash \ Over its hidden
embers (yet a sprinkling of
sulphur \ Will suffice to
rekindle the flame)? \ So
with the heart. It grows
torpid from lack of worry, \
Needs a sharp stimulus to
elicit love. \ Get her
anxious about you, reheat
her tepid passions, \ Tell
her your guilty secrets,
watch her blanch. \ Thrice
fortunate that man, lucky
past calculation, \ Who can
make some poor injured
girl \ Torture herself over
him, lose voice, go pale,
pass out when \ The
unwelcome news reaches
her. Ah, may I \ Be the
one whose hair she tears
out in her fury, the one
whose \ Soft cheeks she rips
with her nails, \ Whom she
sees, eyes glaring, through
a rain of tears; without
whom, \ Try as she will,
she cannot live! \ How long
(you may ask) should you
leave her lamenting her
wrong? A little \ While
only, lest rage gather
strength \ Through
procrastination. By then
you should have her
sobbing \ All over your
