280 • The Art of Seduction
the perfect lady. He had one worry: she was angling to get married, and he
could never marry her—she was an actress with a dubious past. The other
colonels were already scandalized by his involvement with her. Neverthe-
less, the affair went on.
In 1945, Perón was dismissed from his post and jailed. The colonels
feared his growing popularity and distrusted the power of his mistress, who
seemed to have total influence over him. It was the first time in almost two
years that he was truly alone, and truly separated from Eva. Suddenly he felt
new emotions sweeping over him: he pinned her photographs all over the
wall. Outside, massive strikes were being organized to protest his imprison-
ment, but all he could think about was Eva. She was a saint, a woman of
destiny, a heroine. He wrote to her, "It is only being apart from loved ones
that we can measure our affection. From the day I left you ... I have not
been able to calm my sad heart. . . . My immense solitude is full of your
memory." Now he promised to marry her.
The strikes grew in intensity. After eight days, Perón was released from
prison; he promptly married Eva. A few months later he was elected presi-
dent. As first lady, Eva attended state functions in her somewhat gaudy
dresses and jewelry; she was seen as a former actress with a large wardrobe.
Then, in 1947, she left for a tour of Europe, and Argentines followed her
every move—the ecstatic crowds that greeted her in Spain, her audience
with the pope—and in her absence their opinion of her changed. How
well she represented the Argentine spirit, its noble simplicity, its flair for
drama. When she returned a few weeks later, they overwhelmed her with
attention.
Eva too had changed during her trip to Europe: now her dyed blond
hair was pulled into a severe chignon, and she wore tailored suits. It was a
serious look, befitting a woman who was to become the savior of the poor.
Soon her image could be seen everywhere—her initials on the walls, the
sheets, the towels of the hospitals for the poor; her profile on the jerseys of
a soccer team from the poorest part of Argentina, whose club she spon-
sored; her giant smiling face covering the sides of buildings. Since finding
out anything personal about her had become impossible, all kinds of elabo-
rate fantasies began to spring up about her. And when cancer cut her life
short, in 1952, at the age of thirty-three (the age of Christ when he died),
the country went into mourning. Millions filed past her embalmed body.
She was no longer a radio actress, a wife, a first lady, but Evita, a saint.
Interpretation. Eva Duarte was an illegitimate child who had grown up in
poverty, escaped to Buenos Aires to become an actress, and been forced to
do many tawdry things to survive and get ahead in the theater world. Her
dream was to escape all of the constraints on her future, for she was in-
tensely ambitious. Perón was the perfect victim. He imagined himself a
great leader, but the reality was that he was fast becoming a lecherous old
man who was too weak to raise himself up. Eva injected poetry into hisTo attend the theater when
she does, gaze at her
beauty— \ From the
shoulders up she's time \
Most delectably spent, a
feast for adoring glances, \
For the eloquence of
eyebrows, the speaking
sign. \ Applaud when some
male dancer struts on as
the heroine, \ Cheer for
each lover's role. \ When
she leaves, leave too—but
sit there as long as she
does: \ Waste time at your
mistress's whim. . . . \ Get
her accustomed to you; \
Habit's the key, spare no
pains till that's achieved. \
Let her always see you
around, always hear you
talking, \ Show her your
face night and day. \ When
you're confident you'll be
missed, when your absence
\ Seems sure to cause her
regret, \ Then give her
some respite: a field
improves when fallow, \
Parched soil soaks up the
rain. \ Demophoön's
presence gave Phyllis no
more than mild excitement;
\ It was his sailing caused
arson in her heart. \
Penelope was racked by
crafty Ulysses's absence, \
Protesilaus, abroad, made
Laodameia burn. \ Short
partings do best, though:
time wears out affections, \
The absent love fades, a
new one takes its place. \
With Menelaus away,
Helen's disinclination for
sleeping \ Alone led her
into her guest's \ Warm bed
at night. Were you crazy,
Menelaus?
—OVID, THE ART OF LOVE,
TRANSLATED BY PETER GREEN
Concerning the Birth of
Love • Here is what
happens in the soul: •
1. Admiration. • 2. You
think, "Mow delightful it
Poeticize Your Presence • 281
life. Her language was florid and theatrical; she surrounded him with atten-
tion, indeed to the point of suffocation, but a woman's dutiful service to a
great man was a classic image, and was celebrated in innumerable tango bal-
lads. Yet she managed to remain elusive, mysterious, like a movie star you
see all the time on the screen but never really know. And when Perón was
finally alone, in prison, these poetic images and associations burst forth in
his mind. He idealized her madly; as far as he was concerned, she was no
longer an actress with a tawdry past. She seduced an entire nation the same
way. The secret was her dramatic poetic presence, combined with a touch
of elusive distance; over time, you would see whatever you wanted to in
her. To this day people fantasize about what Eva was really like.
Familiarity destroys seduction. This rarely happens early on; there is so
much to learn about a new person. But a midpoint may arrive when the
target has begun to idealize and fantasize about you, only to discover that
you are not what he or she thought. It is not a question of being seen too
often, of being too available, as some imagine. In fact, if your targets see
you too rarely, you give them nothing to feed on, and their attention may
be caught by someone else; you have to occupy their mind. It is more a
matter of being too consistent, too obvious, too human and real. Your tar-
gets cannot idealize you if they know too much about you, if they start to
see you as all too human. Not only must you maintain a degree of distance,
but there must be something fantastical and bewitching about you, sparking
all kinds of delightful possibilities in their mind. The possibility Eva held
out was the possibility that she was what in Argentine culture was consid-
ered the ideal woman—devoted, motherly, saintly—but there are any num-
ber of poetic ideals you can try to embody. Chivalry, adventure, romance,
and so on, are just as potent, and if you have a whiff of them about you,
you can breathe enough poetry into the air to fill people's minds with fan-
tasies and dreams. At all costs, you must embody something, even if it is
roguery and evil. Anything to avoid the taint of familiarity and commonness.
What I need is a woman who is something, anything; ei-
ther very beautiful or very kind or in the last resort very
wicked; very witty or very stupid, but something.
—ALFRED DE MUSSET
Keys to Seduction
We all have a self-image that is more flattering than the truth: we
think of ourselves as more generous, selfless, honest, kindly, intelli-
gent, or good-looking than in fact we are. It is extremely difficult for us to
be honest with ourselves about our own limitations; we have a desperate
need to idealize ourselves. As the writer Angela Carter remarks, we would
rather align ourselves with angels than with the higher primates from
which we are actually descended.would be to kiss her, to
be kissed by her," and so
on. . . . • 3. Hope. You
observe her perfections, and
it is at this moment that a
woman really ought to
surrender, for the utmost
physical pleasure. Even the
most reserved women blush
to the whites of their eyes
at this moment of hope.
The passion is so strong,
and the pleasure so sharp,
that they betray themselves
unmistakably. • 4. Love is
born. To love is to enjoy
seeing, touching, and
sensing with all the senses,
as closely as possible, a
lovable object which loves
in return. • 5. The first
crystallization begins. If
you are sure that a woman
loves you, it is a pleasure
to endow her with a
thousand perfections and to
count your blessings with
infinite satisfaction. In the
end you overrate wildly,
and regard her as
something fallen from
Heaven, unknown as yet,
but certain to be yours. •
Leave a lover with his
thoughts for twenty four
hours, and this is what will
happen: • At the salt
mines of Salzburg, they
throw a leafless wintry
bough into one of the
abandoned workings. Two
or three months later they
haul it out covered with a
shining deposit of crystals.
The smallest twig, no
bigger than a torn-tit's claw,
is studded with a galaxy of
scintillating diamonds. The
original branch is no longer
recognizable. • What I
have called crystallization
is a mental process which
draws from everything that
happens new proofs of the
perfection of the loved
one. . . . • A man in love
sees every perfection in the
object of his love, but his
attention is liable to
