Confuse Desire and Reality—The Perfect Illusion • 299
of the boy, and he did see some resemblance. Over the next few weeks they
managed to meet here and there, and then Bouriscout had an idea: he sym-
pathized with the Cultural Revolution, and he wanted to get around the
prohibitions that were preventing him from seeing Pei Pu, so he offered to
do some spying. The offer was passed along to the right people, and soon
Bouriscout was stealing documents for the Communists. The son, named
Bertrand, was recalled to Beijing, and Bouriscout finally met him. Now a
threefold adventure filled Bouriscout's life: the alluring Pei Pu, the thrill of
being a spy, and the illicit child, whom he wanted to bring back to France.
In 1972, Bouriscout left Beijing. Over the next few years he tried
repeatedly to get Pei Pu and his son to France, and a decade later he fi-
nally succeeded; the three became a family In 1983, though, the French
authorities grew suspicious of this relationship between a Foreign Office
official and a Chinese man, and with a little investigating they uncovered
Bouriscout's spying. He was arrested, and soon made a startling confession:
the man he was living with was really a woman. Confused, the French or-
dered an examination of Pei Pu; as they had thought, he was very much a
man. Bouriscout went to prison.
Even after Bouriscout had heard his former lover's own confession, he
was still convinced that Pei Pu was a woman. Her soft body, their inti-
mate relationship—how could he be wrong? Only when Pei Pu, impris-
oned in the same jail, showed him the incontrovertible proof of his sex did
Bouriscout finally accept it.
Interpretation. The moment Pei Pu met Bouriscout, he realized he had
found the perfect victim. Bouriscout was lonely, bored, desperate. The way
he responded to Pei Pu suggested that he was probably also homosexual, or
perhaps bisexual—at least confused. (Bouriscout in fact had had homo-
sexual encounters as a boy; guilty about them, he had tried to repress this
side of himself.) Pei Pu had played women's parts before, and was quite
good at it; he was slight and effeminate; physically it was not a stretch. But
who would believe such a story, or at least not be skeptical of it?
The critical component of Pei Pu's seduction, in which he brought the
Frenchman's fantasy of adventure to life, was to start slowly and set up an
idea in his victim s mind. In his perfect French (which, however, was full of
interesting Chinese expressions), he got Bouriscout used to hearing stories
and tales, some true, some not, but all delivered in that dramatic yet believ-
able tone. Then he planted the idea of gender impersonation with his
"Story of the Butterfly." By the time he confessed the "truth" of his gen-
der, Bouriscout was already completely enchanted with him.
Bouriscout warded off all suspicious thoughts because he wanted to be-
lieve Pei Pu's story. From there it was easy Pei Pu faked his periods; it didn't
take much money to get hold of a child he could reasonably pass off as
their son. More important, he played the fantasy role to the hilt, remaining
elusive and mysterious (which was what a Westerner would expect from anseducer. . . . After an
interval Pauline pulled a
hell rope and ordered the
woman who answered to
prepare a hath which she
asked me to share.
Wearing bathgowns of the
finest linen we remained
for nearly an hour in the
crystal-clear bluish water.
Then we had a grand
dinner served in another
room and lingered on
together until dusk. When
I left I had to promise to
return again soon and I
spent many afternoons
with the princess in the
same way."
—HARRISON BRENT,
PAULINE BONAPARTE: A
WOMAN OF AFFAIRS
The courtesan is meant to
be a half-defined, floating
figure never fixing herself
surely in the imagination.
She is the memory of an
experience, the point at
which a dream is
transformed into reality or
reality into a dream. The
bright colors fade, her name
becomes a mere echo—echo
of an echo, since she has
probably adopted it from
some ancient predecessor.
The idea of the courtesan
is a garden of delights in
which the lover walks,
smelling first this flower
and then that but never
understanding whence
comes the fragrance that
intoxicates him. Why
should the courtesan not
elude analysis? She does
not want to be recognized
for what she is, but rather
to be allowed to be potent
and effective. She offers the
truth of herself—or, rather,
of the passions that become
directed toward her. And
what she gives back is one's
self and an hour of grace in
her presence. Love revives
300 • The Art of Seduction
Asian woman) while enveloping his past and indeed their whole experience
in titillating bits of history. As Bouriscout later explained, "Pei Pu screwed
me in the head. ... I was having relations and in my thoughts, my dreams,
I was light-years away from what was true."
Bouriscout thought he was having an exotic adventure, an enduring
fantasy of his. Less consciously, he had an outlet for his repressed homo-
sexuality. Pei Pu embodied his fantasy, giving it flesh, by working first on
his mind. The mind has two currents: it wants to believe in things that are
pleasant to believe in, yet it has a self-protective need to be suspicious of
people. If you start off too theatrical, trying too hard to create a fantasy,
you will feed that suspicious side of the mind, and once fed, the doubts will
not go away. Instead, you must start slowly, building trust, while perhaps
letting people see a little touch of something strange or exciting about you
to tease their interest. Then you build up your story, like any piece of fic-
tion. You have established a foundation of trust—now the fantasies and
dreams you envelop them in are suddenly believable.
Remember: people want to believe in the extraordinary; with a little
groundwork, a little mental foreplay, they will fall for your illusion. If any-
thing, err on the side of reality: use real props (like the child Pei Pu showed
Bouriscout) and add the fantastical touches in your words, or an occasional
gesture that gives you a slight unreality. Once you sense that they are
hooked, you can deepen the spell, go further and further into the fantasy.
At that point they will have gone so far into their own minds that you will
no longer have to bother with verisimilitude.
Wish Fulfillment
In 1762, Catherine, wife of Czar Peter III, staged a coup against her inef-
fectual husband and proclaimed herself empress of Russia. Over the next
few years Catherine ruled alone, but kept a series of lovers. The Russians
called these men the vremienchiki, "the men of the moment," and in 1774
the man of the moment was Gregory Potemkin, a thirty-five-year-old lieu-
tenant, ten years younger than Catherine, and a most unlikely candidate for
the role. Potemkin was coarse and not at all handsome (he had lost an eye
in an accident). But he knew how to make Catherine laugh, and he wor-
shiped her so intensely that she eventually succumbed. He quickly became
the love of her life.
Catherine promoted Potemkin higher and higher in the hierarchy,
eventually making him the governor of White Russia, a large southwestern
area including the Ukraine. As governor, Potemkin had to leave St. Peters-
burg and go to live in the south. He knew that Catherine could not do
without male companionship, so he took it upon himself to name Cather-
ine's subsequent vremienchiki. She not only approved of this arrangement,
she made it clear that Potemkin would always remain her favorite.
Catherine's dream was to start a war with Turkey, recapture Constan-when you look at her: is
that not enough? She is
the generative force of an
illusion, the birth point of
desire, the threshold of
contemplation of bodily
beauty.
—LYNNE LAWNER, LIVES OF
THE COURTESANS: PORTRAITS
OF THE RENAISSANCE
It was on March 16, the
same day the Duke of
Gloucester wrote to Sir
William, that Goethe
recorded the first known
performance of what were
destined to be called
Emma's Attitudes. Just
what these were, we shall
learn shortly. First, it must
be emphasized that the
Attitudes were a show
for favored eyes only.
• ... Goethe, disciple of
Winckelmann, was at this
date thrilled by the human
form, as a contemporary
writes. Here was the ideal
spectator for the classical
drama Emma and Sir
William had wrought in
the long winter evenings.
Let us take our seats beside
Goethe and settle to watch
the show as he describes
it. • "Sit William
Hamilton . . . has now,
after many years of
devotion to the arts and the
study of nature, found the
acme of these delights in
the person of an English
girl of twenty with a
beautiful face and a perfect
figure. He has had a
Greek costume made for
her which becomes her
extremely. Dressed in this,
he lets down her hair and,
with a few shawls, gives so
much variety to her poses,
gestures, expressions, etc.
that the spectator can
hardly believe his eyes. He
sees what thousands of
artists would have liked to
