Mix Pleasure with Pain • 377
case unnatural. You are most often nice not out of your own inner good-
ness but out of fear of displeasing, out of insecurity. Go beyond that fear
and you suddenly have options—the freedom to create pain, then magically
dissolve it. Your seductive powers will increase tenfold.
People will be less upset by your hurtful actions than you might imag-
ine. In the world today, we often feel starved for experience. We crave
emotion, even if it is negative. The pain you cause your targets, then, is
bracing—it makes them feel more alive. They have something to complain
about, they get to play the victim. As a result, once you have turned the
pain into pleasure they will readily forgive you. Stir up their jealousy, make
them feel insecure, and the validation you later give their ego by preferring
them over their rivals is doubly delightful. Remember: you have more to
fear by boring your targets than by shaking them up. Wounding people
binds them to you more deeply than kindness. Create tension so you can
release it. If you need inspiration, find the part of the target that most irri-
tates you and use it as a springboard for some therapeutic conflict. The
more real your cruelty, the more effective it is.
In 1818, the French writer Stendhal, then living in Milan, met the
Countess Metilda Viscontini. For him, it was love at first sight. She was a
proud, somewhat difficult woman, and she intimidated Stendhal, who was
terribly afraid of displeasing her with a stupid comment or undignified act.
Finally, unable to take it any longer, he one day took her hand and confessed
his love. Horrified, the countess told him to leave and never come back.
Stendhal flooded Viscontini with letters, begging her to forgive him. At
last, she relented: she would see him again, but under one condition—he
could visit only once every two weeks, for no more than an hour, and only
in the presence of company. Stendhal agreed; he had no choice. He now
lived for those short fortnightly visits, which became occasions of intense
anxiety and fear, since he was never quite sure whether she would change
her mind and banish him forever. This went on for over two years, during
which the countess never showed him the slightest sign of favor. Stendhal
never found out why she had insisted on this arrangement—perhaps she
wanted to toy with him or keep him at a distance. All he knew was that his
love for her only grew stronger, became unbearably intense, until finally he
had to leave Milan.
To get over this sad affair, Stendhal wrote his famous book On Love, in
which he described the effect of fear on desire. First, if you fear the loved
one, you can never get too close or familiar with him or her. The beloved
then retains an element of mystery, which only intensifies your love. Sec-
ond, there is something bracing about fear. It makes you vibrate with sensa-
tion, heightens your awareness, is intensely erotic. According to Stendhal,
the closer the loved one brings you to the edge of the precipice, to the feel-
ing that they could abandon you, the dizzier and more lost you will be-
come. Falling in love means literally falling—losing control, a mix of fear
and excitement.
Apply this wisdom in reverse: never let your targets get too comfortablefor him was in no way
curtailed." • For the
princess, Riom was a
sovereign remedy against
boredom.
—STENDHAL, LOVE,
TRANSLATED BY GILBERT AND
SUZANNE SALE
378 • The Art of Seduction
with you. They need to feel fear and anxiety. Show them some coldness, a
flash of anger they did not expect. Be irrational if necessary. There is always
the trump card: a breakup. Let them feel they have lost you forever, make
them fear that they have lost the power to charm you. Let these feelings sit
with them for a while, then pull them back from the precipice. The recon-
ciliation will be intense.
In 33 B.C., Mark Antony heard a rumor that Cleopatra, his lover of
several years, had decided to seduce his rival, Octavius, and that she was
planning to poison Antony. Cleopatra had poisoned people before; in fact
she was an expert in the art. Antony grew paranoid, and finally one day
confronted her. Cleopatra did not protest her innocence. Yes, that was true,
it was quite within her power to poison Antony at any moment; there were
no precautions he could take. Only the love she felt for him could protect
him. To demonstrate, she took some flowers and dropped them into his
wine. Antony hesitated, then raised the cup to his lips; Cleopatra grabbed
his arm and stopped him. She had a prisoner brought in to drink the wine,
and the prisoner promptly dropped dead. Falling at Cleopatra's feet,
Antony professed that he loved her now more than ever. He did not speak
out of cowardice; there was no man braver than he, and if Cleopatra could
have poisoned him, he for his part could have left her and gone back to
Rome. No, what pushed him over the edge was the feeling that she had
control over his emotions, over life and death. He was her slave. Her
demonstration of her power over him was not only effective but erotic.
Like Antony, many of us have masochistic yearnings without realizing
it. It takes someone to inflict some pain on us for these deeply repressed de-
sires to come to the surface. You must learn to recognize the types of hid-
den masochists out there, for each one enjoys a particular kind of pain. For
instance, there are people who feel that they deserve nothing good in life,
and who, unable to deal with success, sabotage themselves constantly. Be
nice to them, admit that you admire them, and they are uncomfortable,
since they feel that they cannot possibly match up to the ideal figure you
have clearly imagined them to be. Such self-saboteurs do better with a little
punishment; scold them, make them aware of their inadequacies. They feel
they deserve such criticism and when it comes it is with a sense of relief. It
is also easy to make them feel guilty, a feeling that deep down they enjoy.
Other people experience the responsibilities and duties of modern life
as such a heavy burden, they long to give it all up. These people are often
looking for someone or something to worship—a cause, a religion, a guru.
Make them worship you. And then there are those who want to play the
martyr. Recognize them by the joy they take in complaining, in feeling
righteous and wronged; then give them a reason to complain. Remember:
appearances deceive. Often the strongest-looking people—the Kissingers
and Don Mateos—may secretly want to be punished. In any event, follow
up pain with pleasure and you will create a state of dependency that will
last for a long time.
