194 • The Art of Seduction
Symbol: The Theater Curtain. Onstage, the curtain's heavy deep-red
folds attract your eye with their hypnotic surface. But what really
fascinates and draws you in is what you think might be happen-
ing behind the curtain—the light peeking through, the
suggestion of a secret, something about to happen.
You feel the thrill of a voyeur about to
watch a performance.
Reversal
The complexity you signal to other people will only affect them prop-
erly if they have the capacity to enjoy a mystery. Some people like
things simple, and lack the patience to pursue a person who confuses them.
They prefer to be dazzled and overwhelmed. The great Belle Epoque cour-
tesan known as La Belle Otero would work a complex magic on artists and
political figures who fell for her, but in dealing with the more uncompli-
cated, sensual male she would astound them with spectacle and beauty.
When meeting a woman for the first time, Casanova might dress in the
most fantastic outfit, with jewels and brilliant colors to dazzle the eye; he
would use the target's reaction to gauge whether or not she would demand
a more complicated seduction. Some of his victims, particularly young
girls, needed no more than the glittering and spellbinding appearance,
which was really what they wanted, and the seduction would stay on that
level.
Everything depends on your target: do not bother creating depth for
people who are insensitive to it, or who may even be put off or disturbed
by it. You can recognize such types by their preference for the simpler plea-
sures in life, their lack of patience for a more nuanced story. With them,
keep it simple.
Appear to Be an Object of Desire
—Create Triangles
Few are drawn to the person whom others avoid or ne-
glect; people gather around those who have already at-
tracted interest. We want what other people want. To draw
your victims closer and make them hungry to possess you, you
must create an aura of desirability—of being wanted and
courted by many. It will become a point of vanity for them to
be the preferred object of your attention, to win you away from
a crowd of admirers. Manufacture the illusion of popularity
by surrounding yourself with members of the opposite
sex—friends, former lovers, present suitors. Create tri-
angles that stimulate rivalry and raise your value.
Build a reputation that precedes you: if many
have succumbed to your charms,
there must be a reason.
