xvi • Contents
Phase Three: The Precipice—Deepening the Effect Through Extreme Measures
16 Prove Yourself page 321
Most people want to be seduced. If they resist your efforts, it is probably because you ham' not
gone far enough to allay their doubts—about your motives, the depth of your feelings, and so
on. One well-timed action that shows how far you are willing to go to win them over will dis-
pel their doubts. Do not worry about looking foolish or making a mistake—any kind of deed
that is self-sacrificing and for your targets' sake will so overwhelm their emotions, they won't
notice anything else.
17 Effect a Regression page 333
People who have experienced a certain kind of pleasure in the past will try to repeat or relive
it. The deepest-rooted and most pleasurable memories are usually those from earliest child-
hood, and are often unconsciously associated with a parental figure. Bring your targets back to
that point by placing yourself in the oedipal triangle and positioning them as the needy child.
Unaware of the cause of their emotional response, they will fall in love with you.
18 Stir Up the Transgressive and Taboo page 349
There are always social limits on what one can do. Some of these, the most elemental taboos,
go back centuries; others are more superficial, simply defining polite and acceptable behavior.
Making your targets feel that you are leading them past either kind of limit is immensely se-
ductive. People yearn to explore their dark side. Once the desire to transgress draws your tar-
gets to you, it will be hard for them to stop. Take them farther than they imagined—the
shared feeling of guilt and complicity will create a powerful bond.
19 Use Spiritual Lures page 359
Everyone has doubts and insecurities—about their body, their self-worth, their sexuality. If
your seduction appeals exclusively to the physical, you will stir up these doubts and make your
targets self-conscious. Instead, lure them out of their insecurities by making them focus on
something sublime and spiritual: a religious experience, a lofty work of art, the occult. Lost in
a spiritual mist, the target will feel light and uninhibited. Deepen the effect of your seduction
by making its sexual culmination seem like the spiritual union of two souls.
20 Mix Pleasure with Pain page 369
The greatest mistake in seduction is being too nice. At first, perhaps, your kindness is charm-
ing, but it soon grows monotonous; you are trying too hard to please, and seem insecure. In-
stead of overwhelming your targets with niceness, try inflicting some pain. Make them feel
guilty and insecure. Instigate a breakup—now a rapprochement, a return to your earlier kind-
ness, will turn them weak at the knees. The lower the lows you create, the greater the highs.
To heighten the erotic charge, create the excitement of fear.
Contents • xvii
Phase Four: Moving In for the Kill
21 Give Them Space to Fall—The Pursuer Is Pursued page 383
If your targets become too used to you as the aggressor, they will give less of their own energy,
and the tension will slacken. You need to wake them up, turn the tables. Once they are under
your spell, take a step bach and they will start to come after you. Hint that you are growing
bored. Seem interested in someone else. Soon they will want to possess you physically, and re-
straint will go out the window. Create the illusion that the seducer is being seduced.
22 Use Physical Lures page 393
Targets with active minds are dangerous: If they see through your manipulations, they may
suddenly develop doubts. Put their minds gently to rest, and waken their dormant senses, by
combining a nondefensive attitude with a charged sexual presence. While your cool, noncha-
lant air is lowering their inhibitions, your glances, voice, and bearing—oozing sex and
desire—are getting under their skin and raising their temperature. Never force the physical;
instead infect your targets with heat, lure them into lust. Morality, judgment, and concern for
the future will all melt away.
23 Master the Art of the Bold Move page 405
A moment has arrived: Your victim clearly desires you, but is not ready to admit it openly, let
alone act on it. This is the time to throw aside chivalry, kindness, and coquetry and to over-
whelm with a bold move. Don't give the victim time to consider the consequences. Showing
hesitation or awkwardness means you are thinking of yourself as opposed to being over-
whelmed by the victim's charms. One person must go on the offensive, and it is you.
24 Beware the Aftereffects page 415
Danger follows in the aftermath of a successful seduction. After emotions have reached a pitch,
they often swing in the opposite direction—toward lassitude, distrust, disappointment. If you
are to part, make the sacrifice swift and sudden. If you are to stay in a relationship, beware a
flagging of energy, a creeping familiarity that will spoil the fantasy. A second seduction is re-
quired. Never let the other person take you for granted—use absence, create pain and conflict,
to keep the seduced on tenterhooks.
Appendix A: Seductive Environment/Seductive Time page 431
Appendix B: Soft Seduction: How to Sell Anything to the Masses page 441
Selected Bibliography • 455
Index • 457
