Victim Theory
Nobody in this world feels whole and complete. We all sense some gap
in our character, something we need or want but cannot get on our
own. When we fall in love, it is often with someone who seems to fill that
gap. The process is usually unconscious and depends on luck: we wait for
the right person to cross our path, and when we fall for them we hope they
return our love. But the seducer does not leave such things to chance.
Look at the people around you. Forget their social exterior, their obvi-
ous character traits; look behind all of that, focusing on the gaps, the miss-
ing pieces in their psyche. That is the raw material of any seduction. Pay
close attention to their clothes, their gestures, their offhand comments, the
things in their house, certain looks in their eyes; get them to talk about
their past, particularly past romances. And slowly the outline of those miss-
ing pieces will come into view. Understand: people are constantly giving
out signals as to what they lack. They long for completeness, whether the
illusion of it or the reality, and if it has to come from another person, that
person has tremendous power over them. We may call them victims of a
seduction, but they are almost always willing victims.
This chapter outlines the eighteen types of victims, each one of which
has a dominant lack. Although your target may well reveal the qualities of
more than one type, there is usually a common need that ties them to-
gether. Perhaps you see someone as both a New Prude and a Crushed Star,
but what is common to both is a feeling of repression, and therefore a de-
sire to be naughty, along with a fear of not being able or daring enough. In
identifying your victim's type, be careful to not be taken in by outward ap-
pearances. Both deliberately and unconsciously, we often develop a social
exterior designed specifically to disguise our weaknesses and lacks. For in-
stance, you may think you are dealing with someone who is tough and
cynical, without realizing that deep inside they have a soft sentimental core.
They secretly pine for romance. And unless you identify their type and the
emotions beneath their toughness, you lose the chance to truly seduce
them. Most important: expunge the nasty habit of thinking that other peo-
ple have the same lacks you do. You may crave comfort and security, but in
giving comfort and security to someone else, on the assumption they must
want them as well, you are more likely smothering and pushing them away.
Never try to seduce someone who is of your own type. You will be like
two puzzles missing the same parts.
149
150 • The Art of Seduction
The Eighteen Types
The Reformed Rake or Siren. People of this type were once happy-go-
lucky seducers who had their way with the opposite sex. But the day came
when they were forced to give this up—someone corraled them into a rela-
tionship, they were encountering too much social hostility, they were get-
ting older and decided to settle down. Whatever the reason, you can be
sure they feel some resentment and a sense of loss, as if a limb were miss-
ing. We are always trying to recapture pleasures we experienced in the past,
but the temptation is particularly great for the Reformed Rake or Siren be-
cause the pleasures they found in seduction were intense. These types are
ripe for the picking: all that is required is that you cross their path and offer
them the opportunity to resume their rakish or siren ways. Their blood will
stir and the call of their youth will overwhelm them.
It is critical, though, to give these types the illusion that they are the
ones doing the seducing. With the Reformed Rake, you must spark his in-
terest indirectly, then let him burn and glow with desire. With the Re-
formed Siren, you want to give her the impression that she still has the
irresistible power to draw a man in and make him give up everything for
her. Remember that what you are offering these types is not another rela-
tionship, another constriction, but rather the chance to escape the corral
and have some ran. Do not be put off if they are in a relationship; a preex-
isting commitment is often the perfect foil. If hooking them into a rela-
tionship is what you want, hide it as best you can and realize it may not be
possible. The Rake or Siren is unfaithful by nature; your ability to spark the
old feeling gives you power, but then you will have to live with the conse-
quences of their feckless ways.
The Disappointed Dreamer. As children, these types probably spent a lot
of time alone. To entertain themselves they developed a powerful fantasy
life, fed by books and films and other kinds of popular culture. And as they
get older, it becomes increasingly difficult to reconcile their fantasy life
with reality, and so they are often disappointed by what they get. This is
particularly true in relationships. They have been dreaming of romantic he-
roes, of danger and excitement, but what they have is lovers with human
frailties, the petty weaknesses of everyday life. As the years pass, they may
force themselves to compromise, because otherwise they would have to
spend their lives alone; but beneath the surface they are bitter and still hun-
gering for something grand and romantic.
You can recognize this type by the books they read and films they go to,
the way their ears prick up when told of the real-life adventures some peo-
ple manage to live out. In their clothes and home furnishings, a taste for
exuberant romance or drama will peek through. They are often trapped in
drab relationships, and little comments here and there will reveal their dis-
appointment and inner tension.
