The Charmer • 87
personal note or gift, often referring to something they had mentioned in
conversation. The wives who had called her a courtesan and worse slowly
changed their minds. The men found her not only beguiling but useful—
her worldwide contacts were invaluable. She could put them in touch with
exactly the right person without them even having to ask. The Harrimans'
parties soon evolved into fundraising events for the Democratic Party. Put
at their ease, feeling elevated by the aristocratic atmosphere Pamela created
and the sense of importance she gave them, visitors would empty their wal-
lets without realizing quite why. This, of course, was exactly what all the
men in her life had done.
In 1986, Averell Harriman died. By then Pamela was powerful and
wealthy enough that she no longer needed a man. In 1993, she was named
the U.S. ambassador to France, and easily transferred her personal and social
charm into the world of political diplomacy. She was still working when
she died, in 1997.
We often recognize Charmers as such; we sense their cleverness. (Surely
Harriman must have realized that his meeting with Pamela Churchill in
1971 was no coincidence.) Nevertheless, we fall under their spell. The rea-
son is simple: the feeling that Charmers provide is so rare as to be worth the
price we pay.
The world is full of self-absorbed people. In their presence, we know that
everything in our relationship with them is directed toward themselves—
their insecurities, their neediness, their hunger for attention. That rein-
forces our own egocentric tendencies; we protectively close ourselves up. It
is a syndrome that only makes us the more helpless with Charmers. First,
they don't talk much about themselves, which heightens their mystery and
disguises their limitations. Second, they seem to be interested in us, and
their interest is so delightfully focused that we relax and open up to them.
Finally, Charmers are pleasant to be around. They have none of most peo-
ple's ugly qualities—nagging, complaining, self-assertion. They seem to
know what pleases. Theirs is a diffused warmth; union without sex. (You
may think a geisha is sexual as well as charming; her power, however, lies
not in the sexual favors she provides but in her rare self-effacing attentive-
ness.) Inevitably, we become addicted, and dependent. And dependence is
the source of the Charmer's power.
People who are physically beautiful, and who play on their beauty to
create a sexually charged presence, have little power in the end; the bloom
of youth fades, there is always someone younger and more beautiful, and
in any case people tire of beauty without social grace. But they never tire
of feeling their self-worth validated. Learn the power you can wield by
making the other person feel like the star. The key is to diffuse your sexual
presence: create a vaguer, more beguiling sense of excitement through a
generalized flirtation, a socialized sexuality that is constant, addictive, and
never totally satisfied.
88 • The Art of Seduction
3. In December of 1936, Chiang Kai-shek, leader of the Chinese Nation-
alists, was captured by a group of his own soldiers who were angry with his
policies: instead of fighting the Japanese, who had just invaded China, he
was continuing his civil war against the Communist armies of Mao Ze-
dong. The soldiers saw no threat in Mao—Chiang had almost annhilated
the Communists. In fact, they believed he should join forces with Mao
against the common enemy—it was the only patriotic thing to do. The sol-
diers thought by capturing him they could compel Chiang to change his
mind, but he was a stubborn man. Since Chiang was the main impediment
to a unified war against the Japanese, the soldiers contemplated having him
executed, or turned over to the Communists.
As Chiang lay in prison, he could only imagine the worst. Several days
later he received a visit from Zhou Enlai—a former friend and now a lead-
ing Communist. Politely and respectfully, Zhou argued for a united front:
Communists and Nationalists against the Japanese. Chiang could not begin
to hear such talk; he hated the Communists with a passion, and became
hopelessly emotional. To sign an agreement with the Communists in these
circumstances, he yelled, would be humiliating, and would lose me all
honor among my own army. It's out of the question. Kill me if you must.
Zhou listened, smiled, said barely a word. As Chiang's rant ended he
told the Nationalist general that a concern for honor was something he
understood, but that the honorable thing for them to do was actually to
forget their differences and fight the invader. Chiang could lead both
armies. Finally, Zhou said that under no circumstances would he allow his
fellow Communists, or anyone for that matter, to execute such a great man
as Chiang Kai-shek. The Nationalist leader was stunned and moved.
The next day, Chiang was escorted out of prison by Communist
guards, transferred to one of his own army's planes, and sent back to his
own headquarters. Apparently Zhou had executed this policy on his own,
for when word of it reached the other Communist leaders, they were out-
raged: Zhou should have forced Chiang to fight the Japanese, or else should
have ordered his execution—to release him without concessions was the
height of pusillanimity, and Zhou would pay. Zhou said nothing and
waited. A few months later, Chiang signed an agreement to halt the civil
war and join with the Communists against the Japanese. He seemed to have
come to his decision on his own, and his army respected it—they could not
doubt his motives.
Working together, the Nationalists and the Communists expelled the
Japanese from China. But the Communists, whom Chiang had previously
almost destroyed, took advantage of this period of collaboration to regain
strength. Once the Japanese had left, they turned on the Nationalists, who,
in 1949, were forced to evacuate mainland China for the island of For-
mosa, now Taiwan.
Now Mao paid a visit to the Soviet Union. China was in terrible shape
and in desperate need of assistance, but Stalin was wary of the Chinese, and
lectured Mao about the many mistakes he had made. Mao argued back.
