62 • The Art of Seduction
was the latest fashion, and the Broadway dancers and performers who made
up the Revue Nègre were African-American. On opening night, artists
and high society packed the hall. The show was spectacular, as they ex-
pected, but nothing prepared them for the last number, performed by a
somewhat gawky long-legged woman with the prettiest face: Josephine
Baker, a twenty-year-old chorus girl from East St. Louis. She came onstage
bare-breasted, wearing a skirt of feathers over a satin bikini bottom, with
feathers around her neck and ankles. Although she performed her number,
called "Danse Sauvage," with another dancer, also clad in feathers, all eyes
were riveted on her: her whole body seemed to come alive in a way the au-
dience had never seen before, her legs moving with the litheness of a cat,
her rear end gyrating in patterns that one critic likened to a hummingbird's.
As the dance went on, she seemed possessed, feeding off the crowd's ecsta-
tic reaction. And then there was the look on her face: she was having such
fun. She radiated a joy that made her erotic dance oddly innocent, even
slightly comic.
By the following day, word had spread: a star was born. Josephine be-
came the heart of the Revue Nègre, and Paris was at her feet. Within a
year, her face was on posters everywhere; there were Josephine Baker per-
fumes, dolls, clothes; fashionable Frenchwomen were slicking their hair
back a la Baker, using a product called Bakerfix. They were even trying to
darken their skin.
Such sudden fame represented quite a change, for just a few years ear-
lier, Josephine had been a young girl growing up in East St. Louis, one of
America's worst slums. She had gone to work at the age of eight, cleaning
houses for a white woman who beat her. She had sometimes slept in a rat-
infested basement; there had never been heat in the winter. (She had taught
herself to dance in her wild fashion to help keep herself warm.) In 1919,
Josephine had run away and become a part-time vaudeville performer,
landing in New York two years later without money or connections. She
had had some success as a clowning chorus girl, providing comic relief with
her crossed eyes and screwed-up face, but she hadn't stood out. Then she
was invited to Paris. Some other black performers had declined, fearing
things might be still worse for them in France than in America, but
Josephine jumped at the chance.
Despite her success with the Revue Nègre, Josephine did not delude
herself: Parisians were notoriously fickle. She decided to turn the relation-
ship around. First, she refused to be aligned with any club, and developed a
reputation for breaking contracts at will, making it clear that she was ready
to leave in an instant. Since childhood she had been afraid of dependence
on anyone; now no one could take her for granted. This only made impre-
sarios chase her and the public appreciate her the more. Second, she was
aware that although black culture had become the vogue, what the French
had fallen in love with was a kind of caricature. If that was what it took
to be successful, so be it, but Josephine made it clear that she did not take
the caricature seriously; instead she reversed it, becoming the ultimate
The Natural • 63
Frenchwoman of fashion, a caricature not of blackness but of whiteness.
Everything was a role to play—the comedienne, the primitive dancer, the
ultrastylish Parisian. And everything Josephine did, she did with such a light
spirit, such a lack of pretension, that she continued to seduce the jaded
French for years. Her funeral, in 1975, was nationally televised, a huge cul-
tural event. She was buried with the kind of pomp normally reserved only
for heads of state.
From very early on, Josephine Baker could not stand the feeling of having
no control over the world. Yet what could she do in the face of her un-
promising circumstances? Some young girls put all their hopes on a hus-
band, but Josephine's father had left her mother soon after she was born,
and she saw marriage as something that would only make her more misera-
ble. Her solution was something children often do: confronted with a
hopeless environment, she closed herself off in a world of her own making,
oblivious to the ugliness around her. This world was filled with dancing,
clowning, dreams of great things. Let other people wail and moan; Jose-
phine would smile, remain confident and self-reliant. Almost everyone who
met her, from her earliest years to her last, commented on how seductive
this quality was. Her refusal to compromise, or to be what she was expected
to be, made everything she did seem authentic and natural.
A child loves to play, and to create a little self-contained world. When
children are absorbed in make believe, they are hopelessly charming. They
infuse their imaginings with such seriousness and feeling. Adult Naturals do
something similar, particularly if they are artists: they create their own fan-
tasy world, and live in it as if it were the real one. Fantasy is so much more
pleasant than reality, and since most people do not have the power or
courage to create such a world, they enjoy being around those who do. Re-
member: the role you were given in life is not the role you have to accept.
You can always live out a role of your own creation, a role that fits your
fantasy. Learn to play with your image, never taking it too seriously. The
key is to infuse your play with the conviction and feeling of a child, making
it seem natural. The more absorbed you seem in your own joy-filled world,
the more seductive you become. Do not go halfway: make the fantasy you
inhabit as radical and exotic as possible, and you will attract attention like a
magnet.
4. It was the Festival of the Cherry Blossom at the Heian court, in late-
tenth-century Japan. In the emperor's palace, many of the courtiers were
drunk, and others were fast asleep, but the young princess Oborozukiyo,
the emperor's sister-in-law, was awake and reciting a poem: "What can
compare with a misty moon of spring?" Her voice was smooth and deli-
cate. She moved to the door of her apartment to look at the moon. Then,
suddenly, she smelled something sweet, and a hand clutched the sleeve of
her robe. "Who are you?" she said, frightened. "There is nothing to be
