Pay Attention to Detail • 273
danced to perfection, wrote songs in his honor that she sang magnificently,
had a way of looking at him that made his blood boil with desire. She
quickly became his favorite.
Yang Kuei-fei drove the emperor to distraction. He built palaces for her,
spent all his time with her, satisfied her every whim. Before long his king-
dom was bankrupt and ruined. Yang Kuei-fei was an artful seductress who
had a devastating effect on all of the men who crossed her path. There were
so many ways her presence charmed—the scents, the voice, the movements,
the witty conversation, the artful glances, the embroidered gowns. These
pleasurable details turned a mighty king into a distracted baby.
Since time immemorial, women have known that within the most ap-
parently self-possessed man is an animal whom they can lead by filling his
senses with the proper physical lures. The key is to attack on as many fronts
as possible. Do not ignore your voice, your gestures, your walk, your
clothes, your glances. Some of the most alluring women in history have so
distracted their victims with sensual detail that the men fail to notice it is all
an illusion.
From the 1940s on into the early 1960s, Pamela Churchill Harriman
had a series of affairs with some of the most prominent and wealthy men in
the world—Averill Harriman (whom years later she married), Gianni Agnelli
(heir to the Fiat fortune), Baron Elie de Rothschild. What attracted these
men, and kept them in thrall, was not her beauty or her lineage or her viva-
cious personality, but her extraordinary attention to detail. It began with
her attentive look as she listened to your every word, soaking up your
tastes. Once she found her way into your home, she would fill it with your
favorite flowers, get your chef to cook that dish you had tasted only in the
finest restaurants. You mentioned an artist you liked? A few days later that
artist would be attending one of your parties. She found the perfect an-
tiques for you, dressed in the way that most pleased or excited you, and she
did this without your saying a word—she spied, gathered information from
third parties, overheard you talking to someone else. Harriman's attention
to detail had an intoxicating effect on all the men in her life. It had some-
thing in common with the pampering of a mother, there to bring order
and comfort into their lives, attending to their needs. Life is harsh and
competitive. Attending to detail in a way that is soothing to the other per-
son makes them dependent upon you. The key is probing their needs in a
way that is not too obvious, so that when you make precisely the right ges-
ture, it seems uncanny, as if you had read their mind. This is another way of
returning your targets to childhood, when all of their needs were met.
In the eyes of women all over the world, Rudolph Valentino reigned
as the Great Lover through much of the 1920s. The qualities behind his
appeal certainly included his handsome, almost pretty face, his dancing
skills, the strangely exciting streak of cruelty in his manner. But his perhaps
most endearing trait was his time-consuming approach to courtship. His
films would show him seducing a woman slowly, with careful details—
sending her flowers (choosing the variety to match the mood he wanted to
274 • The Art of Seduction
induce), taking her hand, lighting her cigarette, escorting her to romantic
places, leading her on the dance floor. These were silent movies, and his
audiences never got to hear him speak—it was all in his gestures. Men came
to hate him, for their wives and girlfriends now expected the slow, careful
Valentino treatment.
Valentino had a feminine streak; it was said that he wooed a woman the
way another woman would. But femininity need not figure in this ap-
proach to seduction. In the early 1770s, Prince Gregory Potemkin began
an affair with Empress Catherine the Great of Russia that was to last many
years. Potemkin was a manly man, and not at all handsome. But he man-
aged to win the empress's heart by the many little things he did, and con-
tinued to do long after the affair had begun. He spoiled her with wonderful
gifts, never tired of writing her long letters, arranged for all kinds of enter-
tainments for her, composed songs to her beauty. Yet he would appear be-
fore her barefoot, hair uncombed, clothes wrinkled. There was no kind of
fussiness in his attention, which, however, did make it clear he would go to
the ends of the earth for her. A woman's senses are more refined than a
man's; to a woman, Yang Kuei-fei's overt sensual appeal would seem too
hurried and direct. What that means, though, is that all the man really has
to do is take it slowly, making seduction a ritual full of all kinds of little
things he has to do for his target. If he takes his time, he will have her eat-
ing out of his hand.
Everything in seduction is a sign, and nothing more so than clothes. It
is not that you have to dress interestingly, elegantly, or provocatively, but
that you have to dress for your target—have to appeal to your target's tastes.
When Cleopatra was seducing Mark Antony, her dress was not brazenly
sexual; she dressed as a Greek goddess, knowing his weakness for such fan-
tasy figures. Madame de Pompadour, the mistress of King Louis XV, knew
the king's weakness, his chronic boredom; she constantly wore different
clothes, changing not only their color but their style, supplying the king
with a constant feast for his eyes. Pamela Harriman was subdued in the
fashions she wore, befitting her role as a high-society geisha and reflecting
the sober tastes of the men she seduced. Contrast works well here: at work
or at home, you might dress nonchalantly—Marilyn Monroe, for example,
wore jeans and a T-shirt at home—but when you are with the target you
wear something elaborate, as if you were putting on a costume. Your Cin-
derella transformation will stir excitement, and the feeling that you have
done something just for the person you are with. Whenever your attention
is individualized (you would not dress like that for anyone else), it is infi-
nitely more seductive.
In the 1870s, Queen Victoria found herself wooed by Benjamin Dis-
raeli, her own prime minister. Disraeli's words were flattering and his
manner insinuating; he also sent her flowers, valentines, gifts—but not just
any flowers or gifts, the kind that most men would send. The flowers were
primroses, symbols of their simple yet beautiful friendship. From then on,
whenever Victoria saw a primrose she thought of Disraeli. Or he would
