326 • The Art of Seduction
2. Pauline Bonaparte, the sister of Napoleon, had so many affairs with dif-
ferent men over the years that doctors were afraid for her health. She could
not stay with one man for more than a few weeks; novelty was her only
pleasure. After Napoleon married her off to Prince Camillo Borghese, in
1803, her affairs only multiplied. And so, when she met the dashing Major
Jules de Canouville, in 1810, everyone assumed the affair would last no
longer than the others. Of course the major was a decorated soldier, well
educated, an accomplished dancer, and one of the most handsome men in
the army. But Pauline, thirty years old at the time, had had affairs with
dozens of men who could have matched that resume.
A few days after the affair began, the imperial dentist arrived chez
Pauline. A toothache had been causing her sleepless nights, and the dentist
saw he would have to pull out the bad tooth right then and there. No
painkillers were used at the time, and as the man began to take out his vari-
ous instruments, Pauline grew terrified. Despite the pain of the tooth, she
changed her mind and refused to have it pulled.
Major Canouville was lounging on a couch in a silken robe. Taking all
this in, he tried to encourage her to have it done: "A moment or two of
pain and it's over forever. ... A child could go through with it and not ut-
ter a sound." "I'd like to see you do it," she said. Canouville got up, went
over to the dentist, chose a tooth in the back of his own mouth, and or-
dered that it be pulled. A perfectly good tooth was extracted, and Canou-
ville barely batted an eyelash. After this, not only did Pauline let the dentist
do his job, her opinion of Canouville changed: no man had ever done any-
thing like this for her before.
The affair had been going to last but a few weeks; now it stretched on.
Napoleon was not pleased. Pauline was a married woman; short affairs
were allowed, but a deep attachment was embarrassing. He sent Canouville
to Spain, to deliver a message to a general there. The mission would take
weeks, and in the meantime Pauline would find someone else.
Canouville, though, was not your average lover. Riding day and night,
without stopping to eat or sleep, he arrived in Salamanca within a few days.
There he found that he could proceed no farther, since communications
had been cut off, and so, without waiting for further orders, he rode back
to Paris, without an escort, through enemy territory. He could meet with
Pauline only briefly; Napoleon sent him right back to Spain. It was months
before he was finally allowed to return, but when he did, Pauline immedi-
ately resumed her affair with him—an unheard-of act of loyalty on her
part. This time Napoleon sent Canouville to Germany and finally to Rus-
sia, where he died bravely in battle in 1812. He was the only lover Pauline
ever waited for, and the only one she ever mourned.
Interpretation. In seduction, the time often comes when the target has be-
gun to fall for you, but suddenly pulls back. Your motives have begun toof grace, while the
initiation that followed,
and the final sealing of the
pact—or equivalent of
the knightly accolade—
were linked with the rest of
a nobleman's training and
valorous exploits. The
hallmarks of a true lover
and of a perfect knight
were almost identical. The
lover was bound to serve
and obey his lady as a
knight served his lord. In
both cases the pledge was of
a sacred nature.
—NINA EPTON,
LOVE AND THE FRENCH
In one of the goodly towns
of the kingdom of France
there dwelt a nobleman of
good birth, who attended
the schools that he might
learn how virtue and honor
are to be acquired among
virtuous men. But
although he was so
accomplished that at the
age of seventeen or eighteen
years he was, as it were,
both precept and example
to others, Love failed not to
add his lesson to the rest;
and, that he might be the
better harkened to and
received, concealed himself
in the face and the eyes of
the fairest lady in the
whole country round, who
had come to the city in
order to advance a suit-at-
law. But before Love
sought to vanquish the
gentleman by means of this
lady's beauty, he had first
won her heart by letting
her see the perfections of
this young lord; for in good
looks, grace, sense and
excellence of speech he was
surpassed by none. • You,
who know what speedy
way is made by the fire of
love when once it fastens
on the heart and fancy, will
Prove Yourself • 327
seem dubious—perhaps all you are after is sexual favors, or power, or
money. Most people are insecure and doubts like these can ruin the seduc-
tive illusion. In the case of Pauline Bonaparte, she was quite accustomed to
using men for pleasure, and she knew perfectly well that she was being used
in turn. She was totally cynical. But people often use cynicism to cover up
insecurity. Pauline's secret anxiety was that none of her lovers had ever
really loved her—that all of them to a man had really just wanted sex or
political favors from her. When Canouville showed, through concrete ac-
tions, the sacrifices he would make for her—his tooth, his career, his life—
he transformed a deeply selfish woman into a devoted lover. Not that her
response was completely unselfish: his deeds were a boost to her vanity. If
she could inspire these actions from him, she must be worth it. But if he
was going to appeal to the noble sede of her nature, she had to rise to that
level as well, and prove herself by remaining loyal to him.
Making your deed as dashing and chivalrous as possible will elevate the
seduction to a new level, stir up deep emotions, and conceal any ulterior
motives you may have. The sacrifices you are making must be visible; talk-
ing about them, or explaining what they have cost you, will seem like brag-
ging. Lose sleep, fall ill, lose valuable time, put your career on the line,
spend more money than you can afford. You can exaggerate all this for ef-
fect, but don't get caught boasting about it or feeling sorry for yourself:
cause yourself pain and let them see it. Since almost everyone else in
the world seems to have an angle, your noble and selfless deed will be
irresistible.
3. Throughout the 1890s and into the early twentieth century, Gabriele
D'Annunzio was considered one of Italy's premier novelists and play-
wrights. Yet many Italians could not stand the man. His writing was florid,
and in person he seemed full of himself, overdramatic—riding horses naked
on the beach, pretending to be a Renaissance man, and more of the kind.
His novels were often about war, and about the glory of facing and defeat-
ing death—an entertaining subject for someone who had never actually
done so. And so, at the start of World War I, no one was surprised that
D'Annunzio led the call for Italy to side with the Allies and enter the fray.
Everywhere you turned, there he was, giving a speech in favor of war—
a campaign that succeeded in 1915, when Italy finally declared war on
Germany and Austria. D'Annunzio's role so far had been completely pre-
dictable. But what did surprise the Italian public was what this fifty-two-
year-old man did next: he joined the army. He had never served in the
military, boats made him seasick, but he could not be dissuaded. Eventually
the authorities gave him a post in a cavalry division, hoping to keep him
out of combat.
Italy had little experience in war, and its military was somewhat
chaotic. The generals somehow lost track of D'Annunzio—who, in anyreadily imagine that
between two subjects so
perfect as these it knew
little pause until it had
them at its will, and had
so filled them with its clear
light, that thought, wish,
and speech were all aflame
with it. Youth, begetting
fear in the young lord, led
him to urge his suit with
all the gentleness
imaginable; but she, being
conquered by love, had no
need of force to win her.
Nevertheless, shame, which
tarries with ladies as long
as it can, for some time
restrained her from
declaring her mind. But at
last the heart's fortress,
which is honor's abode, was
shattered in such sort that
the poor lady consented to
that which she had never
been minded to refuse. • In
order, however, to make
trial of her lover's patience,
constancy, and love, she
granted him what he
sought on a very hard
condition, assuring him
that if he fulfilled it she
would love him perfectly
forever; whereas, if he
failed in it, he would
certainly never win her as
long as he lived. And the
condition was this: she
would be willing to talk
with him, both being in
bed together, clad in their
linen only, but he was to
ask nothinginore from her
than words and kisses. •
He, thinking there was no
joy to be compared to that
which she promised him,
agreed to the proposal, and
that evening the promise
was kept; in such wise
that, despite all the caresses
she bestowed on him and
the temptations that beset
him, he would not break
his oath. And albeit his
torment seemed to him no
less than that of Purgatory,
