128 • The Art of Seduction
were so vibrant that when he painted jewels, people thought they were real.
Painters were desperate to know his secrets but he never revealed them. He
would leave town as he had entered, suddenly and quietly. His greatest ad-
mirer was Casanova, who met him and never forgot him. When he died,
no one believed it; years, decades, a century later, people were certain he
was hiding somewhere. A person with powers like his never dies.
The count had all the Star qualities. Everything about him was ambigu-
ous and open to interpretation. Colorful and vibrant, he stood out from the
crowd. People thought he was immortal, just as a star seems neither to age
nor to disappear. His words were like his presence—fascinating, diverse,
strange, their meaning unclear. Such is the power you can command by
transforming yourself into a glittering object.
Andy Warhol too obsessed everyone who knew him. He had a distinc-
tive style—those silver wigs—and his face was blank and mysterious. People
never knew what he was thinking; like his paintings, he was pure surface.
In the quality of their presence Warhol and Saint-Germain recall the great
trompe l'oeil paintings of the seventeenth century, or the prints of M. C.
Escher—fascinating mixtures of realism and impossibility, which make
people wonder if they are real or imaginary.
A Star must stand out, and this may involve a certain dramatic flair, of
the kind that Dietrich revealed in her appearances at parties. Sometimes,
though, a more haunting, dreamlike effect can be created by subtle touches:
the way you smoke a cigarette, a vocal inflection, a way of walking. It is
often the little things that get under people's skin, and make them imitate
you—the lock of hair over Veronica Lake's right eye, Cary Grant's voice,
Kennedy's ironic smile. Although these nuances may barely register to the
conscious mind, subliminally they can be as attractive as an object with a
striking shape or odd color. Unconsciously we are strangely drawn to
things that have no meaning beyond their fascinating appearance.
Stars make us want to know more about them. You must learn to stir
people's curiosity by letting them glimpse something in your private life,
something that seems to reveal an element of your personality. Let them
fantasize and imagine. A trait that often triggers this reaction is a hint of
spirituality, which can be devilishly seductive, like James Dean's interest in
Eastern philosophy and the occult. Hints of goodness and big-heartedness
can have a similar effect. Stars are like the gods on Mount Olympus, who
live for love and play. The things you love—people, hobbies, animals—
reveal the kind of moral beauty that people like to see in a Star. Exploit this
desire by showing people peeks of your private life, the causes you fight for,
the person you are in love with (for the moment).
Another way Stars seduce is by making us identify with them, giving us
a vicarious thrill. This was what Kennedy did in his press conference about
Truman: in positioning himself as a young man wronged by an older man,
evoking an archetypal generational conflict, he made young people identify
with him. (The popularity in Hollywood movies of the figure of the disaf-
fected, wronged adolescent helped him here.) The key is to represent aIf you want to know all
about Andy Warhol, just
look at the surface of my
paintings and films and
me, and there I am.
There's nothing behind it.
—ANDY WARHOL, QUOTED IN
STEPHEN KOCH, STARGAZER:
THE LIFE, WORLD & FILMS OF
ANDY WARHOL
The Star • 129
type, as Jimmy Stewart represented the quintessential middle-American,
Cary Grant the smooth aristocrat. People of your type will gravitate to
you, identify with you, share your joy or pain. The attraction must be un-
conscious, conveyed not in your words but in your pose, your attitude.
Now more than ever, people are insecure, and their identities are in flux.
Help them fix on a role to play in life and they will flock to identify with
you. Simply make your type dramatic, noticeable, and easy to imitate. The
power you have in influencing people's sense of self in this manner is insid-
ious and profound.
Remember: everyone is a public performer. People never know exactly
what you think or feel; they judge you on your appearance. You are an ac-
tor. And the most effective actors have an inner distance: like Dietrich, they
can mold their physical presence as if they perceived it from the outside.
This inner distance fascinates us. Stars are playful about themselves, always
adjusting their image, adapting it to the times. Nothing is more laughable
than an image that was fashionable ten years ago but isn't any more. Stars
must always renew their luster or face the worst possible fate: oblivion.
Symbol: The
Idol. A piece of stone carved into the
shape of a god, perhaps glittering with gold
and jewels. The eyes of the worshippers fill the stone
with life, imagining it to have real powers. Its shape allows
them to see what they want to see—a god—but it is actually
just a piece of stone. The god lives in their imaginations.
