Prove Yourself • 327
seem dubious—perhaps all you are after is sexual favors, or power, or
money. Most people are insecure and doubts like these can ruin the seduc-
tive illusion. In the case of Pauline Bonaparte, she was quite accustomed to
using men for pleasure, and she knew perfectly well that she was being used
in turn. She was totally cynical. But people often use cynicism to cover up
insecurity. Pauline's secret anxiety was that none of her lovers had ever
really loved her—that all of them to a man had really just wanted sex or
political favors from her. When Canouville showed, through concrete ac-
tions, the sacrifices he would make for her—his tooth, his career, his life—
he transformed a deeply selfish woman into a devoted lover. Not that her
response was completely unselfish: his deeds were a boost to her vanity. If
she could inspire these actions from him, she must be worth it. But if he
was going to appeal to the noble sede of her nature, she had to rise to that
level as well, and prove herself by remaining loyal to him.
Making your deed as dashing and chivalrous as possible will elevate the
seduction to a new level, stir up deep emotions, and conceal any ulterior
motives you may have. The sacrifices you are making must be visible; talk-
ing about them, or explaining what they have cost you, will seem like brag-
ging. Lose sleep, fall ill, lose valuable time, put your career on the line,
spend more money than you can afford. You can exaggerate all this for ef-
fect, but don't get caught boasting about it or feeling sorry for yourself:
cause yourself pain and let them see it. Since almost everyone else in
the world seems to have an angle, your noble and selfless deed will be
irresistible.
3. Throughout the 1890s and into the early twentieth century, Gabriele
D'Annunzio was considered one of Italy's premier novelists and play-
wrights. Yet many Italians could not stand the man. His writing was florid,
and in person he seemed full of himself, overdramatic—riding horses naked
on the beach, pretending to be a Renaissance man, and more of the kind.
His novels were often about war, and about the glory of facing and defeat-
ing death—an entertaining subject for someone who had never actually
done so. And so, at the start of World War I, no one was surprised that
D'Annunzio led the call for Italy to side with the Allies and enter the fray.
Everywhere you turned, there he was, giving a speech in favor of war—
a campaign that succeeded in 1915, when Italy finally declared war on
Germany and Austria. D'Annunzio's role so far had been completely pre-
dictable. But what did surprise the Italian public was what this fifty-two-
year-old man did next: he joined the army. He had never served in the
military, boats made him seasick, but he could not be dissuaded. Eventually
the authorities gave him a post in a cavalry division, hoping to keep him
out of combat.
Italy had little experience in war, and its military was somewhat
chaotic. The generals somehow lost track of D'Annunzio—who, in anyreadily imagine that
between two subjects so
perfect as these it knew
little pause until it had
them at its will, and had
so filled them with its clear
light, that thought, wish,
and speech were all aflame
with it. Youth, begetting
fear in the young lord, led
him to urge his suit with
all the gentleness
imaginable; but she, being
conquered by love, had no
need of force to win her.
Nevertheless, shame, which
tarries with ladies as long
as it can, for some time
restrained her from
declaring her mind. But at
last the heart's fortress,
which is honor's abode, was
shattered in such sort that
the poor lady consented to
that which she had never
been minded to refuse. • In
order, however, to make
trial of her lover's patience,
constancy, and love, she
granted him what he
sought on a very hard
condition, assuring him
that if he fulfilled it she
would love him perfectly
forever; whereas, if he
failed in it, he would
certainly never win her as
long as he lived. And the
condition was this: she
would be willing to talk
with him, both being in
bed together, clad in their
linen only, but he was to
ask nothinginore from her
than words and kisses. •
He, thinking there was no
joy to be compared to that
which she promised him,
agreed to the proposal, and
that evening the promise
was kept; in such wise
that, despite all the caresses
she bestowed on him and
the temptations that beset
him, he would not break
his oath. And albeit his
torment seemed to him no
less than that of Purgatory,
328 • The Art of Seduction
case, had decided to leave his cavalry division and form units of his own.
(He was an artist, after all, and could not be subjected to army discipline.)
Calling himself Commandante, he overcame his habitual seasickness and di-
rected a series of daring raids, leading groups of motorboats in the middle
of the night into Austrian harbors and firing torpedoes at anchored ships.
He also learned how to fly, and began to lead dangerous sorties. In August
of 1915, he flew over the city of Trieste, then in enemy hands, and dropped
Italian flags and thousands of pamphlets containing a message of hope, writ-
ten in his inimitable style: "The end of your martyrdom is at hand! The
dawn of your joy is imminent. From the heights of heaven, on the wings of
Italy, I throw you this pledge, this message from my heart." He flew at alti-
tudes unheard of at the time, and through thick enemy fire. The Austrians
put a price on his head.
On a mission in 1916, D'Annunzio fell against his machine gun, per-
manently injuring one eye and seriously damaging the other. Told his fly-
ing days were over, he convalesced in his home in Venice. At the time, the
most beautiful and fashionable woman in Italy was generally considered to
be the Countess Morosini, former mistress of the German Kaiser. Her
palace was on the Grand Canal, opposite the home of D'Annunzio. Now
she found herself besieged by letters and poems from the writer-soldier,
mixing details of his flying exploits with declarations of his love. In the
middle of air raids on Venice, he would cross the canal, barely able to see
out of one eye, to deliver his latest poem. D'Annunzio was much beneath
Morosini's station, a mere writer, but his willingness to brave anything on
her behalf won her over. The fact that his reckless behavior could get him
killed any day only hastened the seduction.
D'Annunzio ignored the doctors' advice and returned to flying, leading
even more daring raids than before. By the end of the war, he was Italy's
most decorated hero. Now, wherever in the nation he appeared, the public
filled the piazzas to hear his speeches. After the war, he led a march on
Fiume, on the Adriatic coast. In the negotiations to settle the war, Italians
believed they should have been awarded this city, but the Allies had not
agreed. D'Annunzio's forces took over the city and the poet became a
leader, ruling Fiume for more than a year as an autonomous republic. By
then, everyone had forgotten about his less-than-glorious past as a decadent
writer. Now he could do no wrong.
Interpretation. The appeal of seduction is that of being separated from our
normal routines, experiencing the thrill of the unknown. Death is the ulti-
mate unknown. In periods of chaos, confusion, and death—the plagues
that swept Europe in the Middle Ages, the Terror of the French Revolu-
tion, the air raids on London during World War II—people often let go of
their usual caution and do things they never would otherwise. They expe-
rience a kind of delirium. There is something immensely seductive aboutyet was his love so great
and his hope so strong,
sure as he felt of the
ceaseless continuance of the
love he had thus painfully
won, that he preserved his
patience and rose from
beside her without having
done anything contrary to
her expressed wish. • The
lady was, I think, more
astonished than pleased by
such virtue; and giving no
heed to the honor, patience,
and faithfulness her lover
had shown in the keeping
of his oath, she forthwith
suspected that his love was
not so great as she had
thought, or else that he had
found her less pleasing
than he had expected. •
She therefore resolved,
before keeping her promise,
to make a further trial of
the love he bore her; and to
this end she begged him to
talk to a girl in her service,
who was younger than
herself and very beautiful,
bidding him make love
speeches to her, so that
those who saw him come so
often to the house might
think that it was for the
sake of this damsel and not
of herself • The young
lord, feeling sure that his
own love was returned in
equal measure, was wholly
obedient to her commands,
and for love of her
compelled himself to make
love to the girl; and she,
finding him so handsome
and well-spoken, believed
his lies more than other
truth, and loved him as
much as though she herself
were greatly loved by him.
• The mistress finding that
matters were thus well
advanced, albeit the young
lord did not cease to claim
her promise, granted him
permission to come and see
her at one hour after
midnight, saying that after
