216 • The Art of Seduction
pete with the thousands of preconceived notions that are already there, and
get nowhere. Besides, people resent your attempt to persuade them, as if
they were incapable of deciding by themselves—as if you knew better.
Consider instead the power of insinuation and suggestion. It requires some
patience and art, but the results are more than worth it.
The way insinuation works is simple: disguised in a banal remark or en-
counter, a hint is dropped. It is about some emotional issue—a possible
pleasure not yet attained, a lack of excitement in a person's life. The hint
registers in the back of the target's mind, a subtle stab at his or her insecuri-
ties; its source is quickly forgotten. It is too subtle to be memorable at the
time, and later, when it takes root and grows, it seems to have emerged
naturally from the target's own mind, as if it was there all along. Insinuation
lets you bypass people's natural resistance, for they seem to be listening only
to what has originated in themselves. It is a language on its own, communi-
cating directly with the unconscious. No seducer, no persuader, can hope
to succeed without mastering the language and art of insinuation.
A strange man once arrived at the court of Louis XV. No one knew
anything about him, and his accent and age were unplaceable. He called
himself Count Saint-Germain. He was obviously wealthy; all kinds of gems
and diamonds glittered on his jacket, his sleeves, his shoes, his fingers. He
could play the violin to perfection, paint magnificently. But the most in-
toxicating thing about him was his conversation.
In truth, the count was the greatest charlatan of the eighteenth
century—a man who had mastered the art of insinuation. As he spoke, a
word here and there would slip out—a vague allusion to the philosopher's
stone, which turned base metal into gold, or to the elixir of life. He did not
say he possessed these things, but he made you associate him with their
powers. Had he simply claimed to have them, no one would have believed
him and people would have turned away. The count might refer to a man
who had died forty years earlier as if he had known him personally; had
this been so, the count would have had to be in his eighties, although he
looked to be in his forties. He mentioned the elixir of life. ... he seems so
young. . . .
The key to the count's words was vagueness. He always dropped his
hints into a lively conversation, grace notes in an ongoing melody. Only
later would people reflect on what he had said. After a while, people started
to come to him, inquiring about the philosopher's stone and the elixir of
life, not realizing that it was he who had planted these ideas in their minds.
Remember: to sow a seductive idea you must engage people's imaginations,
their fantasies, their deepest yearnings. What sets the wheels spinning is
suggesting things that people already want to hear—the possibility of plea-
sure, wealth, health, adventure. In the end, these good things turn out to be
precisely what you seem to offer them. They will come to you as if on
their own, unaware that you insinuated the idea in their heads.
In 1807, Napoleon Bonaparte decided it was critical for him to win
the Russian Czar Alexander I to his side. He wanted two things out of theappearance, who unless I
am mistaken is a close
acquaintance of yours. I
really couldn't say what his
name is, but he is tall and
handsome, his clothes are
brown and elegantly cut,
and, possibly because he is
unaware of my resolute
nature, he appears to have
laid siege to me. He turns
up infallibly whenever I
either look out of my
window or stand at the
front door or leave the
house, and I am surprised,
in fact, that he is not here
now. Needless to say, I am
very upset about all this,
because his sort of conduct
frequently gives an honest
woman a bad name, even
though she is quite
innocent. • " . . . For the
love of God, therefore, I
implore you to speak to
him severely and persuade
him to refrain from his
importunities. There are
plenty of other women who
doubtless find this sort of
thing amusing, and who
will enjoy being ogled and
spied upon by him, but I
personally have no
inclination for it
whatsoever, and I find his
behavior exceedingly
disagreeable." • And
having reached the end of
her speech, the lady bowed
her head as though she
were going to burst into
tears. • The reverend friar
realized immediately who
it was to whom she was
referring, and having
warmly commended her
purity of mind . . . he
promised to take all
necessary steps to ensure
that the fellow ceased to
annoy her. . . . • Shortly
afterward, the gentleman in
question paid one of his
regular visits to the
reverend friar, and after
they had conversed together
for a while on general
Master the Art of Insinuation • 217
czar: a peace treaty in which they agreed to carve up Europe and the Mid-
dle East; and a marriage alliance, in which he would divorce his wife
Josephine and marry into the czar's family. Instead of proposing these
things directly, Napoleon decided to seduce the czar. Using polite social
encounters and friendly conversations as his battlefields, he went to work.
An apparent slip of the tongue revealed that Josephine could not bear chil-
dren; Napoleon quickly changed the subject. A comment here and there
seemed to suggest a linking of the destinies of France and Russia. Just be-
fore they were to part one evening, he talked of his desire for children,
sighed sadly, then excused himself for bed, leaving the czar to sleep on
this. He escorted the czar to a play on the themes of glory, honor, and
empire; now, in later conversations, he could disguise his insinuations un-
der the cover of discussing the play. Within a few weeks, the czar was
speaking to his ministers of a marriage alliance and a treaty with France as
if they were his own ideas.
Slips of the tongue, apparently inadvertent "sleep on it" comments, al-
luring references, statements for which you quickly apologize—all of these
have immense insinuating power. They get under people's skin like a poi-
son, and take on a life of their own. The key to succeeding with your in-
sinuations is to make them when your targets are at their most relaxed or
distracted, so that they are not aware of what is happening. Polite banter is
often the perfect front for this; people are thinking about what they will say
next, or are absorbed in their own thoughts. Your insinuations will barely
register, which is how you want it.
In one of his early campaigns, John F. Kennedy addressed a group of
veterans. Kennedy's brave exploits during World War II—the PT-109 inci-
dent had made him a war hero—were known to all; but in the speech, he
talked of the other men on the boat, never mentioning himself. He knew,
however, that what he had done was on everyone's mind, because in fact he
had put it there. Not only did his silence on the subject make them think of
it on their own, it made Kennedy seem humble and modest, qualities that
go well with heroism. In seduction, as the French courtesan Ninon de
l'Enclos advised, it is better not to talk about your love for a person. Let
your target read it in your manner. Your silence on the subject will have
more insinuating power than if you had addressed it directly.
Not only words insinuate; pay attention to gestures and looks. Madame
Récamier's favorite technique was to keep her words banal and the look in
her eyes enticing. The flow of conversation would keep men from thinking
too deeply about these occasional looks, but they would be haunted by
them. Lord Byron had his famous "underlook": while everyone was dis-
cussing some uninteresting subject, he would seem to hang his head, but
then a young woman (the target) would see him glancing upward at her, his
head still tilted. It was a look that seemed dangerous, challenging, but also
ambiguous; many women were hooked by it. The face speaks its own lan-
guage. We are used to trying to read people's faces, which are often better
indicators of their feelings than what they say, which is so easy to control.topics, the friar drew him to
one side and reproached
him in a very kindly sort of
way for the amorous
glances which, as the lady
had given him to
understand, he believed
him to be casting in her
direction. • Not
unnaturally, the gentleman
was amazed, for he had
never so much as looked at
the lady and it was very
seldom that he passed by
her house. . . . • The
gentleman, being rather
more perceptive than the
reverend friar, was not
exactly slow to appreciate
the lady's cleverness, and
putting on a somewhat
sheepish expression, he
promised not to bother her
any more. But after leaving
the friar, he made his way
toward the house of the
lady, who was keeping
continuous vigil at a tiny
little window so that she
would see him if he
happened to pass by. . . .
And from that day
forward, proceeding with
the maximum prudence
and conveying the
impression that he was
engaged in some other
business entirely, he became
a regular visitor to the
neighborhood.
—GIOVANNI BOCCACCIO, THE
DECAMERON, TRANSLATED BY
G. H. MCWILLIAM
Glances are the heavy
artillery of the flirt:
everything can be conveyed
in a look, yet that look can
always be denied, for it
cannot be quoted word for
word.
—STENDHAL, QUOTED IN
RICHARD DAVENPORT-HINES,
ED., VICE: AN ANTHOLOGY
