Master the Art of the Bold Move • 411
could be quite coquettish. Richelieu bided his time. He befriended her,
charming her with the wit that had made him the favorite of the ladies.
One night a group of such women, including the duchess, decided to play
a practical joke on him, in which he was to be forced naked out of his
room at the palace of Versailles. The joke worked to perfection, the ladies
all got to see him in his native glory, and had a good chuckle watching him
run away. There were many places Richelieu could have hidden; the place
he chose was the duchess's bedroom. Minutes later he watched her enter
and undress, and once the candles were extinguished, he crept into bed
with her. She protested, tried to scream. He covered her mouth with kisses,
and she eventually and happily relented. Richelieu had decided to make his
bold move then for several reasons. First, the duchess had come to like him,
and even to harbor a secret desire for him. She would never act upon it or
admit it, but he was certain it existed. Second, she had seen him naked, and
could not help but be impressed. Third, she would feel a touch of pity for
his predicament, and for the joke played on him. Richelieu, a consummate
seducer, would find no more perfect moment.
The bold move should come as a pleasant surprise, but not too much of
a surprise. Learn to read the signs that the target is falling for you. His or
her manner toward you will have changed—it will be more pliant, with
more words and gestures mirroring yours—yet there will still be a touch of
nervousness and uncertainty. Inwardly they have given in to you, but they
do not expect a bold move. This is the time to strike. If you wait too long,
to the point where they consciously desire and expect you to make a move,
it loses the piquancy of coming as a surprise. You want a degree of tension
and ambivalence, so that the move represents a great release. Their surren-
der will relieve tension like a long-awaited summer storm. Don't plan your
bold move in advance; it cannot seem calculated. Wait for the opportune
moment, as Richelieu did. Be attentive to favorable circumstances. This
will give you room to improvise and go with the moment, which will
heighten the impression you want to create of being suddenly over-
whelmed by desire. If you ever sense that the victim is expecting the bold
move, take a step back, lull them into a false sense of security, then strike.
Sometime in the fifteenth century, the writer Bandello relates, a young
Venetian widow had a sudden lust for a handsome nobleman. She had her
father invite him to their palace to discuss business, but during the meeting
the father had to leave, and she offered to give the young man a tour of the
place. His curiosity was piqued by her bedroom, which she described as the
most splendid room in the palace, but which she also passed by without let-
ting him enter. He begged to be shown the room, and she granted his wish.
He was spellbound: the velvets, the rare objets, the suggestive paintings, the
delicate white candles. A beguiling scent filled the room. The widow put
out all of the candles but one, then led the man to the bed, which had been
heated with a warming pan. He quickly succumbed to her caresses. Follow
the widow's example: your bold move should have a theatrical quality to it.
That will make it memorable, and make your aggressiveness seem pleasant,A man should proceed to
enjoy any woman when
she gives him an
opportunity and makes her
own love manifest to him
by the following signs: she
calls out to a man without
first being addressed by
him; she shows herself to
him in secret places; she
speaks to him tremblingly
and inarticulately; her face
blooms with delight and
her fingers or toes perspire;
and sometimes she remains
with both hands placed on
his body as if she had been
surprised by something, or
as if overcome with fatigue.
• After a woman has
manifested her love to him
by outward signs, and by
the motions of her body,
the man should make every
possible attempt to conquer
her. There should be no
indecision or hesitancy: if
an opening is found the
man should make the most •
of it. The woman, indeed,
becomes disgusted with the
man if he is timid about
his chances and throws
them away. Boldness is the
rule, for everything is to be
gained, and nothing lost.
—THE HINDU ART OF LOVE,
COLLECTED AND EDITED BY
EDWARD WINDSOR
412 • The Art of'Seduction
part of the drama. The theatricality can come from the setting—an exotic
or sensual location. It can also come from your actions. The widow piqued
her victim's curiosity by creating the suspense about her bedroom. An ele-
ment of fear—someone might find you, say—will heighten the tension.
Remember: you are creating a moment that must stand out from the same-
ness of daily life.
Keeping your targets emotional will both weaken them and heighten
the drama of the moment. And the best way to keep them at an emotional
pitch is by infecting them with emotions of your own. When Valmont
wanted the Presidents to become calm, angry, or tender, he showed that
emotion first, and she mirrored it. People are very susceptible to the moods
of those around them; this is particularly acute at the latter stages of a se-
duction, when resistance is low and the target has fallen under your spell.
At the point of the bold move, learn to infect your target with whatever
emotional mood you require, as opposed to suggesting the mood with
words. You want access to the target's unconscious, which is best obtained
by infecting them with emotions, bypassing their conscious ability to resist.
It may seem expected for the male to make the bold move, but history
is full of successfully bold females. There are two main forms of feminine
boldness. In the first, more traditional form, the coquettish woman stirs
male desire, is completely in control, then at the last minute, after bringing
her victim to a boil, steps back and lets him make the bold move. She sets it
up, then signals with her eyes, her gestures, that she is ready for him. Cour-
tesans have used this method throughout history; it is how Cleopatra
worked on Antony, how Josephine seduced Napoleon, how La Belle Otero
amassed a fortune during the Belle Epoque. It lets the man maintain his
masculine illusions, although the woman is really the aggressor.
The second form of feminine boldness does not bother with such illu-
sions: the woman simply takes charge, initiates the first kiss, pounces on
her victim. This is how Marguerite de Valois, Lou Andreas-Salomé, and
Madame Mao operated, and many men find it not emasculating at all but
very exciting. It all depends on the insecurities and proclivities of the vic-
tim. This kind of feminine boldness has its allure because it is more rare
than the first kind, but then all boldness is somewhat rare. A bold move will
always stand out compared to the usual treatment afforded by the tepid hus-
band, the timid lover, the hesitant suitor. That is how you want it. If every-
one were bold, boldness would quickly lose its allure.
