The Charismatic • 111
In 1943, those magazines published a most exciting story: Eva had
begun an affair with one of the most dashing men in the new military
government, Colonel Juan Perón. Now Argentines heard her doing propa-
ganda spots for the government, lauding the "New Argentina" that glis-
tened in the future. And finally, this fairy tale story reached its perfect
conclusion: in 1945 Juan and Eva married, and the following year, the
handsome colonel, after many trials and tribulations (including a spell in
prison, from which he was freed by the efforts of his devoted wife) was
elected president. He was a champion of the descamisados—the "shirtless
ones," the workers and the poor, just as his wife was. Only twenty-six at the
time, she had grown up in poverty herself.
Now that this star was the first lady of the republic, she seemed to
change. She lost weight, most definitely; her outfits became less flamboy-
ant, even downright austere; and that beautiful flowing hair was now pulled
back, rather severely. It was a shame—the young star had grown up. But as
Argentines saw more of the new Evita, as she was now known, her new
look affected them more strongly. It was the look of a saintly, serious
woman, one who was indeed what her husband called the "Bridge of
Love" between himself and his people. She was now on the radio all the
time, and listening to her was as emotional as ever, but she also spoke mag-
nificently in public. Her voice was lower and her delivery slower; she
stabbed the air with her fingers, reached out as if to touch the audience.
And her words pierced you to the core: "I left my dreams by the wayside in
order to watch over the dreams of others. ... I now place my soul at the
side of the soul of my people. I offer them all my energies so that my body
may be a bridge erected toward the happiness of all. Pass over it ... toward
the supreme destiny of the new fatherland."
It was no longer only through magazines and the radio that Evita made
herself felt. Almost everyone was personally touched by her in some way.
Everyone seemed to know someone who had met her, or who had visited
her in her office, where a line of supplicants wound its way through the
hallways to her door. Behind her desk she sat, so calm and full of love. Film
crews recorded her acts of charity: to a woman who had lost everything,
Evita would give a house; to one with a sick child, free care in the finest
hospital. She worked so hard, no wonder rumor had it that she was ill. And
everyone heard of her visits to the shanty towns and to hospitals for the
poor, where, against the wishes of her staff, she would kiss people with all
kinds of maladies (lepers, syphilitic men, etc.) on the cheek. Once an assis-
tant appalled by this habit tried to dab Evita's lips with alcohol, to sterilize
them. This saint of a woman grabbed the bottle and smashed it against the
wall.
Yes, Evita was a saint, a living madonna. Her appearance alone could
heal the sick. And when she died of cancer, in 1952, no outsider to Ar-
gentina could possibly understand the sense of grief and loss she left be-
hind. For some, the country never recovered.
* * *As for me, I have the gift
of electrifying men.
—NAPOLEON BONAPARTE, IN
PIETER GEYL, NAPOLEON: FOR
AND AGAINST
I do not pretend to be a
divine man, but I do
believe in divine guidance,
divine power, and divine
prophecy. I am not
educated, nor am I an
expert in any particular
field—but I am sincere and
my sincerity is my
credentials.
—MALCOLM X, QUOTED IN
EUGENE VICTORWOLFENSTEIN,
THE VICTIMS OF DEMOCRACY:
MALCOLM X AND THIS BLACK
REVOLUTION
112 • The Art of Seduction
Most of us live in a semi-somnambulistic state: we do our daily tasks and
the days fly by. The two exceptions to this are childhood and those mo-
ments when we are in love. In both cases, our emotions are more engaged,
more open and active. And we equate feeling emotional with feeling more
alive. A public figure who can affect people's emotions, who can make
them feel communal sadness, joy, or hope, has a similar effect. An appeal to
the emotions is far more powerful than an appeal to reason.
Eva Perón knew this power early on, as a radio actress. Her tremulous
voice could make audiences weep; because of this, people saw in her great
charisma. She never forgot the experience. Her every public act was framed
in dramatic and religious motifs. Drama is condensed emotion, and the
Catholic religion is a force that reaches into your childhood, hits you where
you cannot help yourself. Evita's uplifted arms, her staged acts of charity,
her sacrifices for the common folk—all this went straight to the heart. It
was not her goodness alone that was charismatic, although the appear-
ance of goodness is alluring enough. It was her ability to dramatize her
goodness.
You must learn to exploit the two great purveyors of emotion: drama
and religion. Drama cuts out the useless and banal in life, focusing on mo-
ments of pity and terror; religion deals with matters of life and death.
Make your charitable actions dramatic, give your loving words religious
import, bathe everything in rituals and myths going back to childhood.
Caught up in the emotions you stir, people will see over your head the halo
of charisma.
The deliverer. In Harlem in the early 1950s, few African-Americans knew
much about the Nation of Islam, or ever stepped into its temple. The Na-
tion preached that white people were descended from the devil and that
someday Allah would liberate the black race. This doctrine had little mean-
ing for Harlemites, who went to church for spiritual solace and turned in
practical matters to their local politicians. But in 1954, a new minister for
the Nation of Islam arrived in Harlem.
The minister's name was Malcolm X, and he was well-read and elo-
quent, yet his gestures and words were angry. Word spread: whites had
lynched Malcolm's father. He had grown up in a juvenile facility, then had
survived as a small-time hustler before being arrested for burglary and
spending six years in prison. His short life (he was only twenty—nine at the
time) had been one long run-in with the law, yet look at him now—so
confident and educated. No one had helped him; he had done it all on his
own. Harlemites began to see Malcolm X everywhere, handing out fliers,
addressing the young. He would stand outside their churches, and as the
congregation dispersed, he would point to the preacher and say, "He repre-
sents the white man's god; I represent the black man's god." The curious
began to come to hear him preach at a Nation of Islam temple. He would
ask them to look at the actual conditions of their lives: "When you get
