8 • The Art of Seduction
would suddenly turn cold or angry and he would have to find a way to re-
gain her favor.
The weeks went by. Caesar got rid of all Cleopatra's rivals and found
excuses to stay in Egypt. At one point she led him on a lavish historical ex-
pedition down the Nile. In a boat of unimaginable splendor—towering
fifty-four feet out of the water, including several terraced levels and a pil-
lared temple to the god Dionysus—Caesar became one of the few Romans
to gaze on the pyramids. And while he stayed long in Egypt, away from
his throne in Rome, all kinds of turmoil erupted throughout the Roman
Empire.
When Caesar was murdered, in 44 B.C., he was succeeded by a triumvi-
rate of rulers including Mark Antony, a brave soldier who loved pleasure
and spectacle and fancied himself a kind of Roman Dionysus. A few years
later, while Antony was in Syria, Cleopatra invited him to come meet her
in the Egyptian town of Tarsus. There—once she had made him wait for
her—her appearance was as startling in its way as her first before Caesar. A
magnificent gold barge with purple sails appeared on the river Cydnus. The
oarsmen rowed to the accompaniment of ethereal music; all around the
boat were beautiful young girls dressed as nymphs and mythological figures.
Cleopatra sat on deck, surrounded and fanned by cupids and posed as the
goddess Aphrodite, whose name the crowd chanted enthusiastically.
Like all of Cleopatra's victims, Antony felt mixed emotions. The exotic
pleasures she offered were hard to resist. But he also wanted to tame her—to
defeat this proud and illustrious woman would prove his greatness. And so
he stayed, and, like Caesar, fell slowly under her spell. She indulged him in
all of his weaknesses—gambling, raucous parties, elaborate rituals, lavish
spectacles. To get him to come back to Rome, Octavius, another member of
the Roman triumvirate, offered him a wife: Octavius's own sister, Octavia,
one of the most beautiful women in Rome. Known for her virtue and
goodness, she could surely keep Antony away from the "Egyptian whore."
The ploy worked for a while, but Antony was unable to forget Cleopatra,
and after three years he went back to her. This time it was for good: he had
in essence become Cleopatra's slave, granting her immense powers, adopting
Egyptian dress and customs, and renouncing the ways of Rome.
Only one image of Cleopatra survives—a barely visible profile on a coin—
but we have numerous written descriptions. She had a long thin face and a
somewhat pointed nose; her dominant features were her wonderfully large
eyes. Her seductive power, however, did not lie in her looks—indeed many
among the women of Alexandria were considered more beautiful than she.
What she did have above all other women was the ability to distract a man.
In reality, Cleopatra was physically unexceptional and had no political
power, yet both Caesar and Antony, brave and clever men, saw none of
this. What they saw was a woman who constantly transformed herself be-
fore their eyes, a one-woman spectacle. Her dress and makeup changed
from day to day, but always gave her a heightened, goddesslike appearance.down upon them, and
broke into their liquid song.
• "Draw near," they sang,
"illustrious Odysseus,
flower of Achaean chivalry,
and bring your ship to rest
so that you may hear our
voices. No seaman ever
sailed his black ship past
this spot without listening
to the sweet tones that flow
from our lips . . ." • The
lovely voices came to me
across the water, and my
heart was filled with such a
longing to listen that with
nod and frown I signed to
my men to set me free.
—HOMER, THE ODYSSEY, BOOK
XII, TRANSLATED BY E.V. RIEU
The charm of [Cleopatra's]
presence was irresistible,
and there was an attraction
in her person and talk,
together with a peculiar
force of character, which
pervaded her every word
and action, and laid all
who associated with her
under its spell. It was a
delight merely to hear the
sound of her voice, with
which, like an instrument
of many strings, she could
pass from one language to
another.
—PLUTARCH, MAKERS OF
ROME, TRANSLATED BY IAN
SCOTT-KILVERT
The immediate attraction
of a song, a voice, or scent.
The attraction of the
panther with his perfumed
scent . . . According to the
ancients, the panther is
the only animal who emits
a perfumed odor. It uses
this scent to draw and
capture its victims. . . .
But what is it that seduces
in a scent? . . . What is it
in the song of the Sirens
that seduces us, or in the
beauty of a face, in the depths
The Siren • 9
Her voice, which all writers talk of, was lilting and intoxicating. Her words
could be banal enough, but were spoken so sweetly that listeners would
find themselves remembering not what she said but how she said it.
Cleopatra provided constant variety—tributes, mock battles, expedi-
tions, costumed orgies. Everything had a touch of drama and was accom-
plished with great energy. By the time your head lay on the pillow beside
her, your mind was spinning with images and dreams. And just when you
thought you had this fluid, larger-than-life woman, she would turn distant
or angry, making it clear that everything was on her terms. You never pos-
sessed Cleopatra, you worshiped her. In this way a woman who had been
exiled and destined for an early death managed to turn it all around and
rule Egypt for close to twenty years.
From Cleopatra we learn that it is not beauty that makes a Siren but
rather a theatrical streak that allows a woman to embody a man's fantasies.
A man grows bored with a woman, no matter how beautiful; he yearns for
different pleasures, and for adventure. All a woman needs to turn this
around is to create the illusion that she offers such variety and adventure. A
man is easily deceived by appearances; he has a weakness for the visual.
Create the physical presence of a Siren (heightened sexual allure mixed
with a regal and theatrical manner) and he is trapped. He cannot grow
bored with you yet he cannot discard you. Keep up the distractions, and
never let him see who you really are. He will follow you until he drowns.
The Sex Siren
Norma Jean Mortensen, the future Marilyn Monroe, spent part of her
childhood in Los Angeles orphanages. Her days were filled with
chores and no play. At school, she kept to herself, smiled rarely, and
dreamed a lot. One day when she was thirteen, as she was dressing for
school, she noticed that the white blouse the orphanage provided for her
was torn, so she had to borrow a sweater from a younger girl in the house.
The sweater was several sizes too small. That day, suddenly, boys seemed to
gather around her wherever she went (she was extremely well-developed
for her age). She wrote in her diary, "They stared at my sweater as if it were
a gold mine."
The revelation was simple but startling. Previously ignored and even
ridiculed by the other students, Norma Jean now sensed a way to gain at-
tention, maybe even power, for she was wildly ambitious. She started to
smile more, wear makeup, dress differently. And soon she noticed some-
thing equally startling: without her having to say or do anything, boys fell
passionately in love with her. "My admirers all said the same thing in differ-
ent ways," she wrote. "It was my fault, their wanting to kiss me and hug
me. Some said it was the way I looked at them—with eyes full of passion.
Others said it was my voice that lured them on. Still others said I gave off
vibrations that floored them."of an abyss . . . ?
Seduction lies in the
annulment of signs and
their meaning, in pure
appearance. The eyes that
seduce have no meaning,
they end in the gaze, as
the face with makeup
ends in only pure
appearance. . . . The scent
of the panther is also a
meaningless message—and
behind the message the
panther is invisible, as is
the woman beneath her
makeup. The Sirens too
remained unseen. The
enchantment lies in what
is hidden.
—JEAN BAUDRILLARD, DE LA
SÉDUCTION
We're dazzled by feminine
adornment, by the surface,
\ All gold and jewels: so
little of what we observe \
Is the girl herself And
where (you may ask) amid
such plenty \ Can our
object of passion be found?
The eye's deceived \ By
Love's smart camouflage.
—OVID, CURES FOR LOVE,
TRANSLATED BY PETER GREEN
He was herding his cattle
on Mount Gargarus, the
highest peak of Ida, when
Hermes, accompanied by
Hera, Athene, and
Aphrodite delivered the
golden apple and Zeus's
message: "Paris, since you
are as handsome as you are
wise in affairs of the heart,
Zeus commands you to
judge which of these
goddesses is the fairest. " •
"So be it," sighed Paris.
"But first I beg the losers
not to be vexed with me. I
am only a human being,
liable to make the stupidest
