52 • The Art of Seduction
Dangers
The Dandy's strength, but also the Dandy's problem, is that he or she
often works through transgressive feelings relating to sex roles. Al-
though this activity is highly charged and seductive, it is also dangerous,
since it touches on a source of great anxiety and insecurity. The greater
dangers will often come from your own sex. Valentino had immense appeal
for women, but men hated him. He was constantly dogged with accusa-
tions of being perversely unmasculine, and this caused him great pain. Sa-
lomé was equally disliked by women; Nietzsche's sister, and perhaps his
closest friend, considered her an evil witch, and led a virulent campaign
against her in the press long after the philosopher's death. There is little to
be done in the face of resentment like this. Some Dandies try to fight the
image they themselves have created, but this is unwise: to prove his mas-
culinity, Valentino would engage in a boxing match, anything to prove his
masculinity. He wound up looking only desperate. Better to accept society's
occasional gibes with grace and insolence. After all, the Dandies' charm is
that they don't really care what people think of them. That is how Andy
Warhol played the game: when people tired of his antics or some scandal
erupted, instead of trying to defend himself he would simply move on to
some new image—decadent bohemian, high-society portraitist, etc.—as if
to say, with a hint of disdain, that the problem lay not with him but with
other people's attention span.
Another danger for the Dandy is the fact that insolence has its limits.
Beau Brummel prided himself on two things: his trimness of figure and his
acerbic wit. His main social patron was the Prince of Wales, who, in later
years, grew plump. One night at dinner, the prince rang for the butler, and
Brummel snidely remarked, "Do ring, Big Ben." The prince did not ap-
preciate the joke, had Brummel shown out, and never spoke to him again.
Without royal patronage, Brummel fell into poverty and madness.
Even a Dandy, then, must measure out his impudence. A true Dandy
knows the difference between a theatrically staged teasing of the powerful
and a remark that will truly hurt, offend, or insult. It is particularly impor-
tant to avoid insulting those in a position to injure you. In fact the pose
may work best for those who can afford to offend—artists, bohemians, etc.
In the work world, you will probably have to modify and tone down your
Dandy image. Be pleasantly different, an amusement, rather than a person
who challenges the group's conventions and makes others feel insecure.
Child-
hood is the golden paradise we
are always consciously or unconsciously try-
ing to re-create. The Natural embodies the longed-
for qualities of childhood—spontaneity, sincerity, unpre-
tentiousness. In the presence of Naturals, we feel at ease,
caught up in their playful spirit, transported back to that
golden age. Naturals also make a virtue out of weakness, elicit-
ing our sympathy for their trials, making us want to protect
them and help them. As with a child, much of this is natu-
ral, but some of it is exaggerated, a conscious seductive
maneuver. Adopt the pose of the Natural to
neutralize people's natural defensiveness
and infect them with helpless
delight.
