
The Spectacular Siren
In the year 48 B.C., Ptolemy XIV of Egypt managed to depose and exile
his sister and wife, Queen Cleopatra. He secured the country's borders
against her return and began to rule on his own. Later that year, Julius Cae-
sar came to Alexandria to ensure that despite the local power struggles,
Egypt would remain loyal to Rome.
One night Caesar was meeting with his generals in the Egyptian palace,
discussing strategy, when a guard entered to report that a Greek merchant
was at the door bearing a large and valuable gift for the Roman leader.
Caesar, in the mood for a little fun, gave the merchant permission to enter.
The man came in, carrying on his shoulders a large rolled-up carpet. He
undid the rope around the bundle and with a snap of his wrists unfurled
it—revealing the young Cleopatra, who had been hidden inside, and who
rose up half clothed before Caesar and his guests, like Venus emerging from
the waves.
Everyone was dazzled at the sight of the beautiful young queen (only
twenty-one at the time) appearing before them suddenly as if in a dream.
They were astounded at her daring and theatricality—smuggled into the
harbor at night with only one man to protect her, risking everything on a
bold move. No one was more enchanted than Caesar. According to the
Roman writer Dio Cassius, "Cleopatra was in the prime of life. She had a
delightful voice which could not fail to cast a spell over all who heard it.
Such was the charm of her person and her speech that they drew the cold-
est and most determined misogynist into her toils. Caesar was spellbound as
soon as he set eyes on her and she opened her mouth to speak." That same
evening Cleopatra became Caesar s lover.
Caesar had had numerous mistresses before, to divert him from the rig-
ors of his campaigns. But he had always disposed of them quickly to return
to what really thrilled him—political intrigue, the challenges of warfare,
the Roman theater. Caesar had seen women try anything to keep him un-
der their spell. Yet nothing prepared him for Cleopatra. One night she
would tell him how together they could revive the glory of Alexander the
Great, and rule the world like gods. The next she would entertain him
dressed as the goddess Isis, surrounded by the opulence of her court.
Cleopatra initiated Caesar in the most decadent revelries, presenting herself
as the incarnation of the Egyptian exotic. His life with her was a constant
game, as challenging as warfare, for the moment he felt secure with her sheIn the mean time our good
ship, with that perfect wind
to drive her, fast
approached the Sirens' Isle.
But now the breeze
dropped, some power lulled
the waves, and a breathless
calm set in. Rising from
their seats my men drew
in the sail and threw it into
the hold, then sat down
at the oars and churned the
water white with their
blades of polished pine.
Meanwhile I took a large
round of wax, cut it up
small with my sword, and
kneaded the pieces with all
the strength of my fingers.
The wax soon yielded to
my vigorous treatment and
grew warm, for I had the
rays of my Lord the Sun to
help me. I took each of my
men in turn and plugged
their ears with it. They
then made me a prisoner
on my ship by binding me
hand and foot, standing
me up by the step of the
mast and tying the rope's
ends to the mast itself.
This done, they sat down
once more and struck the
grey water with their oars.
• We made good progress
and had just come within
call of the shore when the
Sirens became aware that a
ship was swiftly bearing
7
