The Seducer's Victims—The Eighteen Types • 157
strange way of seducing, but in this case it works. You should appear to like
the Aging Baby's youthful spirit (it helps if you actually do), can engage
with it, but you remain the indulgent adult. By being responsible you free
the Baby to play. Act the loving adult to the hilt, never judging or criticiz-
ing their behavior, and a strong attachment will form. Aging Babies can be
amusing for a while, but, like all children, they are often potently narcissis-
tic. This limits the pleasure you can have with them. You should see them
as short-term amusements or temporary outlets for your frustrated parental
instincts.
The Rescuer. We are often drawn to people who seem vulnerable or
weak—their sadness or depression can actually be quite seductive. There
are people, however, who take this much further, who seem to be attracted
only to people with problems. This may seem noble, but Rescuers usually
have complicated motives: they often have sensitive natures and truly want
to help. At the same time, solving people's problems gives them a kind of
power they relish—it makes them feel superior and in control. It is also the
perfect way to distract them from their own problems. You will recognize
these types by their empathy—they listen well and try to get you to open
up and talk. You will also notice they have histories of relationships with
dependent and troubled people.
Rescuers can make excellent victims, particularly if you enjoy chival-
rous or maternal attention. If you are a woman, play the damsel in distress,
giving a man the chance so many men long for—to act the knight. If you
are a man, play the boy who cannot deal with this harsh world; a female
Rescuer will envelop you in maternal attention, gaining for herself the
added satisfaction of feeling more powerful and in control than a man. An
air of sadness will draw either gender in. Exaggerate your weaknesses, but
not through overt words or gestures—let them sense that you have had too
little love, that you have had a string of bad relationships, that you have got-
ten a raw deal in life. Having lured your Rescuer in with the chance to help
you, you can then stoke the relationship's fires with a steady supply of
needs and vulnerabilities. You can also invite moral rescue: you are bad.
You have done bad things. You need a stern yet loving hand. In this case
the Rescuer gets to feel morally superior, but also the vicarious thrill of in-
volvement with someone naughty.
The Roué. These types have lived the good life and experienced many
pleasures. They probably have, or once had, a good deal of money to fi-
nance their hedonistic lives. On the outside they tend to seem cynical and
jaded, but their worldliness often hides a sentimentality that they have
struggled to repress. Roués are consummate seducers, but there is one type
that can easily seduce them—the young and the innocent. As they get
158 • The Art of Seduction
older, they hanker after their lost youth; missing their long-lost innocence,
they begin to covet it in others.
If you should want to seduce them, you will probably have to be some-
what young and to have retained at least the appearance of innocence. It is
easy to play this up—make a show of how little experience you have in the
world, how you still see things as a child. It is also good to seem to resist
their advances: Roués will think it lively and exciting to chase you. You can
even seem to dislike or distrust them—that will really spur them on. By be-
ing the one who resists, you control the dynamic. And since you have the
youth that they are missing, you can maintain the upper hand and make
them fall deeply in love. They will often be susceptible to such a fall, be-
cause they have tamped down their own romantic tendencies for so long
that when it bursts forth, they lose control. Never give in too early, and
never let your guard down—such types can be dangerous.
The Idol Worshiper. Everyone feels an inner lack, but Idol Worshipers
have a bigger emptiness than most people. They cannot be satisfied with
themselves, so they search the world for something to worship, something
to fill their inner void. This often assumes the form of a great interest in
spiritual matters or in some worthwhile cause; by focusing on something
supposedly elevated, they distract themselves from their own void, from
what they dislike about themselves. Idol Worshipers are easy to spot—they
are the ones pouring their energies into some cause or religion. They often
move around over the years, leaving one cult for another.
The way to seduce these types is to simply become their object of wor-
ship, to take the place of the cause or religion to which they are so dedi-
cated. At first you may have to seem to share their spiritual interest, joining
them in their worship, or perhaps exposing them to a new cause; eventually
you will displace it. With this type you have to hide your flaws, or at least
to give them a saintly sheen. Be banal and Idol Worshipers will pass you by.
But mirror the qualities they aspire to have for themselves and they will
slowly transfer their adoration to you. Keep everything on an elevated
plane—let romance and religion flow into one.
Keep two things in mind when seducing this type. First, they tend to
have overactive minds, which can make them quite suspicious. Because
they often lack physical stimulation, and because physical stimulation will
distract them, give them some: a mountain trek, a boat trip, or sex will do
the trick. But this takes a lot of work, for their minds are always ticking.
Second, they often suffer from low self-esteem. Do not try to raise
it; they will see through you, and your efforts at praising them will clash
with their own self-image. They are to worship you; you are not to wor-
ship them. Idol Worshipers make perfectly adequate victims in the short
term, but their endless need to search will eventually lead them to look for
something new to adore.
