Appendix B: Soft Seduction: How to Sell Anything to the Masses • 447
ride through the crowd, spurring people into "huzzahs!" for Jackson. Oth-
ers would lead the crowd in songs about Old Hickory.
The Democrats, for the first time in an election, conducted opinion
polls, finding out what the common man thought about the candidates.
These polls were published in the papers, and the overwhelming conclu-
sion was that Jackson was ahead. Yes, a new movement was sweeping the
country. It all came to a head when Jackson made a personal appearance in
New Orleans as part of a celebration commemorating the battle he had
fought so bravely there fourteen years earlier. This was unprecedented: no
presidential candidate had ever campaigned in person before, and in fact
such an appearance would have been considered improper. But Jackson
was a new kind of politician, a true man of the people. Besides, he insisted
that his purpose for the visit was patriotism, not politics. The spectacle
was unforgettable—Jackson entering New Orleans on a steamboat as the
fog lifted, cannon fire ringing out from all sides, grand speeches, endless
feasts, a kind of mass delirium taking over the city. One man said it was
"like a dream. The world has never witnessed so glorious, so wonderful a
celebration—never have gratitude and patriotism so happily united."
This time the will of the people prevailed. Jackson was elected president.
And it was not one region that brought him victory: New Englanders,
Southerners, Westerners, merchants, farmers, and workers were all infected
with the Jackson fever.
Interpretation. After the debacle of 1824, Jackson and his supporters were
determined to do things differently in 1828. America was becoming more
diverse, developing populations of immigrants, Westerners, urban laborers,
and so on. To win a mandate Jackson would have to overcome new re-
gional and class differences. One of the first and most important steps his
supporters took was to found newspapers all around the country. While he
himself seemed to have retired from public life, these papers promulgated
an image of him as the wronged war hero, the victimized man of the peo-
ple. In truth, Jackson was wealthy, as were all of his major backers. He
owned one of the largest plantations in Tennessee, and he owned many
slaves. He drank more fine liquor than hard cider and slept on a soft bed
with European linens. And while he might have been uneducated, he was
extremely shrewd, with a shrewdness built on years of army combat.
The image of the man of the earth disguised all this, and, once it was
established, it could be contrasted with the aristocratic image of Adams. In
this way Jackson's strategists covered up his political inexperience and made
the election turn on questions of character and values. Instead of politi-
cal issues they raised trivial matters like drinking habits and church atten-
dance. To keep up the enthusiasm they staged spectacles that seemed to
be spontaneous celebrations but in fact were carefully choreographed. The
support for Jackson seemed to be a movement, as evidenced (and advanced)
448 • Appendix B: Soft Seduction: How to Sell Anything to the Masses
by the opinion polls. The event in New Orleans—hardly nonpolitical, and
Louisiana was a swing state—bathed Jackson in an aura of patriotic, quasi-
religious grandeur.
Society has fractured into smaller and smaller units. Communities are
less cohesive; even individuals feel more inner conflict. To win an election
or to sell anything in large numbers, you have to paper over these differ-
ences somehow—you have to unify the masses. The only way to accom-
plish this is to create an inclusive image, one that attracts and excites people
on a basic, almost unconscious level. You are not talking about the truth, or
about reality; you are forging a myth.
Myths create identification. Build a myth about yourself and the com-
mon people will identify with your character, your plight, your aspirations,
just as you identify with theirs. This image should include your flaws, high-
light the fact that you are not the best orator, the most educated man, the
smoothest politician. Seeming human and down to earth disguises the
manufactured quality of your image. To sell this image you need to have
the proper vagueness. It is not that you avoid talk of issues and details—that
will make you seem insubstantial—but that all your talk of issues is framed
within the softer context of character, values, and vision. You want to
lower taxes, say, because it will help families—and you are a family person.
You must not only be inspiring but also entertaining—that is a popular,
friendly touch. This strategy will infuriate your opponents, who will try to
unmask you, reveal the truth behind the myth; but that will only make
them seem smug, overserious, defensive, and snobbish. That now becomes
part of their image, and it will help sink them.
2. On Easter Sunday, March 31, 1929, New York churchgoers began to
pour onto Fifth Avenue after the morning service for the annual Easter pa-
rade. The streets were blocked off, and as had been the custom for years,
people were wearing their finest outfits, women in particular showing off
the latest in spring fashions. But this year the promenaders on Fifth Avenue
noticed something else. Two young women were coming down the steps of
Saint Thomas's Church. At the bottom they reached into their purses, took
out cigarettes—Lucky Strikes—and lit up. Then they walked down the
avenue with their escorts, laughing and puffing away. A buzz went through
the crowd. Women had only recently begun smoking cigarettes, and it was
considered improper for a lady to be seen smoking in the street. Only a
certain kind of woman would do that. These two, however, were elegant
and fashionable. People watched them intently, and were further astounded
several minutes later when they reached the next church along the avenue.
Here two more young ladies—equally elegant and well bred—left the
church, approached the two holding cigarettes, and, as if suddenly inspired
to join them, pulled out Lucky Strikes of their own and asked for a light.
Now the four women were marching together down the avenue. They
were steadily joined by more, and soon ten young women were holding
