
Raising the Temperature
In 1889, the top New York theatrical manager Ernest Jurgens visited
France on one of his many scouting trips. Jurgens was known for his
honesty, a rare commodity in the shady entertainment world, and for
his ability to find unusual acts. He had to spend the night in Marseilles, and
while wandering along the quay of the old harbor, he heard excited catcalls
issuing from a working-class cabaret, and decided to go in. A twenty-one-
year-old Spanish dancer named Caroline Otero was performing, and the
minute Jurgens laid eyes on her he was a changed man. Her appearance was
startling—five foot ten, fiery dark eyes, black waist-length hair, her body
corseted into a perfect hourglass figure. But it was the way she danced that
made his heart pound—her whole body alive, writhing like an animal in
heat, as she performed a fandango. Her dancing was hardly professional, but
she enjoyed herself so much and was so unrestrained that none of that mat-
tered. Jurgens also could not help but notice the men in the cabaret watch-
ing her, their mouths agape.
After the show, Jurgens went backstage to introduce himself. Otero's
eyes came alive as he spoke of his job and of New York. He felt a heat, a
twitching, in his body as she looked him up and down. Her voice was deep
and raspy, the tongue constantly in play as she rolled her Rs. Closing the
door, Otero ignored the knocks and pleas of the admirers dying to speak to
her. She said that her way of dancing was natural—her mother was a gypsy,
Soon she asked Jurgens to be her escort that evening, and as he helped her
with her coat, she leaned back toward him slightly, as if she had lost her
balance. As they walked around the city, her arm in his, she would occa-
sionally whisper in his ear. Jurgens felt his usual reserve melt away. He held
her tighter. He was a family man, had never considered cheating on his
wife, but without thinking, he brought Otero back to his hotel room. She
began to take off some of her clothes—coat, gloves, hat—a perfectly nor-
mal thing to do, but the way she did it made him lose all restraint. The nor-
mally timid Jurgens went on the attack.
The next morning Jurgens signed Otero to a lucrative contract—a great
risk, considering that she was an amateur at best. He brought her to Paris
and assigned a top theatrical coach to her. Hurrying back to New York, he
fed the newspapers with reports of this mysterious Spanish beauty poised to
conquer the city. Soon rival papers were claiming she was an Andalusian
countess, an escaped harem girl, the widow of a sheik, on and on. HeThe year was 1907 and
La Belle [Otero], by then,
had been an international
figure for over a dozen
years. The story was told
by M. Maurice Chevalier.
• "I was a young star
about to make my first
appearance at the Folies.
Otero had been the
headliner there for several
weeks and although I
knew who she was I had
never seen her before on
stage or off • "I was
scurrying along, head bent,
thinking of something or
other, when I looked up.
There was La Belle, in the
company of another
woman, walking in my
direction. Otero was then
nearly forty and I was not
yet out of my teens but—
ah!—she was so beautiful!
• "She was tall, dark-
haired, with a magnificent
body, like the bodies of the
women of those days, not
like the lightweight ones of
today." • Chevalier smiled.
• "Of course I like modern
women, too, but there was
something of a fatal charm
about Otero. We three
stood there for a moment or
two, not saying a word, I
staring at La Belle, not so
young as she once was and
maybe not so beautiful, but
395
