330 • The Art of Seduction
had disgraced knighthood by riding in the cart. But no one could stop him
or slow him down, and finally he discovered that the queen's kidnapper was
the wicked Meleagant. He caught up with Meleagant and the two fought a
duel. Still weak from the chase, Lancelot seemed to be near defeat, but
when word reached him that the queen was watching the battle, he recov-
ered his strength and was on the verge of killing Meleagant when a truce
was called. Guinevere was handed over to him.
Lancelot could hardly contain his joy at the thought of finally being in
his lady's presence. But to his shock, she seemed angry, and would not look
at her rescuer. She told Meleagant's father, "Sire, in truth he has wasted his
efforts. I shall always deny that I feel any gratitude toward him." Lancelot
was mortified but he did not complain. Much later, after undergoing innu-
merable further trials, she finally relented and they became lovers. One day
he asked her: when she had been abducted by Meleagant, had she heard the
story of the cart, and how he had disgraced knighthood? Was that why she
had treated him so coldly that day? The queen replied, "By delaying for
two steps you showed your unwillingness to climb into it. That, to tell the
truth, is why I didn't wish to see you or speak with you."
Interpretation. The opportunity to do your selfless deed often comes upon
you suddenly. You have to show your worth in an instant, right there on
the spot. It could be a rescue situation, a gift you could make or a favor you
could do, a sudden request to drop everything and come to their aid. What
matters most is not whether you act rashly, make a mistake, and do some-
thing foolish, but that you seem to act on their behalf without thought for
yourself or the consequences.
At moments like these, hesitation, even for a few seconds, can ruin all
the hard work of your seduction, revealing you as self-absorbed, unchival-
rous, and cowardly. This, at any rate, is the moral of Chrétien de Troyes's
twelfth-century version of the story of Lancelot. Remember: not only
what you do matters, but how you do it. If you are naturally self-absorbed,
learn to disguise it. React as spontaneously as possible, exaggerating the ef-
fect by seeming flustered, overexcited, even foolish—love has driven you to
that point. If you have to jump into the cart for Guinevere's sake, make sure
she sees that you do it without the slightest hesitation.
5. In Rome sometime around 1531, word spread of a sensational young
woman named Tullia d'Aragona. By the standards of the period, Tullia was
not a classic beauty; she was tall and thin, at a time when the plump and
voluptuous woman was considered the ideal. And she lacked the cloying,
giggling manner of most young girls who wanted masculine attention. No,
her quality was nobler. Her Latin was perfect, she could discuss the latest
literature, she played the lute and sang. In other words, she was a novelty,
and since that was all most men were looking for, they began to visit her inown, had her arms round
his neck, speaking to him
the while in such loving
words and with so
beautiful a countenance,
that there is not a hermit
so holy but he would have
forgotten his beads for love
of her. • But when the
gentleman recognized her
with both eye and ear, and
found he was not with her
for whose sake he had so
greatly suffered, the love
that had made him get so
quickly into the bed, made
him rise from it still more
quickly. And in anger
equally with mistress and
damsel, he said— "Neither
your folly nor the malice of
her who put you there can
make me other than I am.
But do you try to be an
honest woman, for you
shall never lose that good
name through me. " • So
saying he rushed out of the
room in the greatest wrath
imaginable, and it was long
before he returned to see his
mistress. However love,
which is never without
hope, assured him that the
greater and more manifest
his constancy was proved to
be by all these trials, the
longer and more delightful
would be his bliss. • The
lady, who had seen and
heard all that passed, was
so delighted and amazed at
beholding the depth and
constancy of his love, that
she was impatient to sec
him again in order to ask
h is fo rgiven ess for the
sorrow that she had caused
him to endure. And as
soon as she could meet
with him, she failed not to
address him in such
excellent and pleasant
words, that he not only
forgot all his troubles but
even deemed them very
fortunate, seeing that their
issue was to the glory of his
constancy and the perfect
Prove Yourself • 331
great numbers. She had a lover, a diplomat, and the thought that one man
had won her physical favors drove them all mad. Her male visitors began to
compete for her attention, writing poems in her honor, vying to become
her favorite. None of them succeeded, but they kept on trying.
Of course there were some who were offended by her, stating publicly
that she was no more than a high-class whore. They repeated the rumor
(perhaps true) that she had made older men dance while she played the
lute, and if their dancing pleased her, they could hold her in their arms. To
Tullia's faithful followers, all of noble birth, this was slander. They wrote a
document that was distributed far and wide: "Our honored mistress, the
well-born and honorable lady Tullia d'Aragona, doth surpass all ladies of
the past, present, or future by her dazzling qualities. . . . Anyone who re-
fuses to conform to this statement is hereby charged to enter the lists with
one of the undersigned knights, who will convince him in the customary
manner."
Tullia left Rome in 1535, going first to Venice, where the poet Tasso
became her lover, and eventually to Ferrara, which was then perhaps the
most civilized court in Italy. And what a sensation she caused there. Her
voice, her singing, even her poems were praised far and wide. She opened a
literary academy devoted to ideas of freethinking. She called herself a muse
and, as in Rome, a group of young men collected around her. They would
follow her around the city, carving her name in trees, writing sonnets in her
honor, and singing them to anyone who would listen.
One young nobleman was driven to distraction by this cult of adora-
tion: it seemed that everyone loved Tullia but no one received her love in
return. Determined to steal her away and marry her, this young man
tricked her into allowing him to visit her at night. He proclaimed his undy-
ing devotion, showered her with jewels and presents, and asked for her
hand. She refused. He pulled out a knife, she still refused, and so he stabbed
himself. He lived, but now Tullia's reputation was even greater than before:
not even money could buy her favors, or so it seemed. As the years went
by and her beauty faded, some poet or intellectual would always come to
her defense and protect her. Few of them ever pondered the reality: that
Tullia was indeed a courtesan, one of the most popular and well paid in the
profession.
Interpretation. All of us have defects of some sort. Some of these we are
born with, and cannot help. Tullia had many such defects. Physically she
was not the Renaissance ideal. Also, her mother had been a courtesan, and
she was illegitimate. Yet the men who fell under her spell did not care.
They were too distracted by her image—the image of an elevated woman,
a woman you would have to fight over to win. Her pose came straight out
of the Middle Ages, the days of knights and troubadours. Then, a woman,
most often married, was able to control the power dynamic between the
sexes by withholding her favors until the knight somehow proved his worthassurance of his love, the
fruit of which he enjoyed
from that time as fully as
he could desire.
—QUEEN MARGARET OF
NAVARRE, THE HEPTAMERON,
QUOTED IN THE VICE
ANTHOLOGY, EDITED BY
RICHARD DAVENPORT-HINES
A soldier lays siege to
cities, a lover to girls'
houses, \ The one assaults
city gates, the other front
doors. \ Love, like war, is a
toss-up. The defeated can
recover, \ While some you
might think invincible
collapse; \ So if you've got
love written off as an easy
option \ You'd better think
twice. Love calls \ For guts
and initiative. Great
Achilles sulks for Briseis—
\ Quick, Trojans, smash
through the Argive wall! \
Hector went into battle
from Andromache's
embraces \ Helmeted by his
wife. \ Agamemnon
himself, the Supremo, was
struck into raptures \ At
the sight of Cassandra's
tumbled hair; \ Even Mars
was caught on the job, felt
the blacksmith's meshes—
\ Heaven's best scandal in
years. Then take \ My own
case. I was idle, born to
leisure en deshabille, \
Mind softened by lazy
scribbling in the shade. \
But love for a pretty girl
soon drove the sluggard \
To action, made him join
up. \And just look at me
now—fighting fit, dead
keen on night exercises: \ If
you want a cure for
slackness, fall in love!
—OVID, THE AMORES,
TRANSLATED BY PETER GREEN
