The Charismatic • 99
in dealing with the country's many problems, that the public began to see
him as their savior, someone with intense charisma.
Mystery. Mystery lies at charisma's heart, but it is a particular kind of
mystery—a mystery expressed by contradiction. The Charismatic may be
both proletarian and aristocratic (Mao Zedong), both cruel and kind (Peter
the Great), both excitable and icily detached (Charles de Gaulle), both inti-
mate and distant (Sigmund Freud). Since most people are predictable, the
effect of these contradictions is devastatingly charismatic. They make you
hard to fathom, add richness to your character, make people talk about you.
It is often better to reveal your contradictions slowly and subtly—if you
throw them out one on top of the other, people may think you have an er-
ratic personality. Show your mysteriousness gradually and word will spread.
You must also keep people at arm's length, to keep them from figuring
you out.
Another aspect of mystery is a hint of the uncanny. The appearance of
prophetic or psychic gifts will add to your aura. Predict things authorita-
tively and people will often imagine that what you have said has come true.
Saintliness. Most of us must compromise constantly to survive; saints do
not. They must live out their ideals without caring about the consequences.
The saintly effect bestows charisma.
Saintliness goes far beyond religion: politicians as disparate as George
Washington and Lenin won saintly reputations by living simply, despite
their power—by matching their political values to their personal lives. Both
men were virtually deified after they died. Albert Einstein too had a saintly
aura—childlike, unwilling to compromise, lost in his own world. The key
is that you must already have some deeply held values; that part cannot be
faked, at least not without risking accusations of charlatanry that will de-
stroy your charisma in the long run. The next step is to show, as simply and
subtly as possible, that you live what you believe. Finally, the appearance of
being mild and unassuming can eventually turn into charisma, as long as
you seem completely comfortable with it. The source of Harry Truman's
charisma, and even of Abraham Lincoln's, was to appear to be an Everyman.That devil of a man
exercises a fascination on
me that I cannot explain
even to myself, and in such
a degree that, though I fear
neither God nor devil,
when I am in his presence
I am ready to tremble like
a child, and he could make
me go through the eye of a
needle to throw myself into
the fire.
—GENERAL VANDAMME, ON
NAPOLEON BONAPARTE
[The masses] have never
thirsted after truth. They
demand illusions, and
cannot do without them.
They constantly give what
is unreal precedence over
what is real; they are
almost as strongly
influenced by what is
untrue as by what is true.
They have an evident
tendency not to distinguish
between the two.
—SIGMUND FREUD, THE
STANDARD EDITION OFTHE
COMPLETE PSYCHOLOGICAL
WORKS OF SIGMUND FREUD,
VOLUME I8
Eloquence. A Charismatic relies on the power of words. The reason is
simple: words are the quickest way to create emotional disturbance. They
can uplift, elevate, stir anger, without referring to anything real. During the
Spanish Civil War, Dolores Gómez Ibarruri, known as La Pasionaria, gave
pro-Communist speeches that were so emotionally powerful as to deter-
mine several key moments in the war. To bring off this kind of eloquence,
it helps if the speaker is as emotional, as caught up in words, as the audi-
ence is. Yet eloquence can be learned: the devices La Pasionaria used—
100 • The Art of Seduction
catchwords, slogans, rhythmic repetitions, phrases for the audience to re-
peat—can easily be acquired. Roosevelt, a calm, patrician type, was able to
make himself a dynamic speaker, both through his style of delivery, which
was slow and hypnotic, and through his brilliant use of imagery, allitera-
tion, and biblical rhetoric. The crowds at his rallies were often moved to
tears. The slow, authoritative style is often more effective than passion in
the long run, for it is more subtly spellbinding, and less tiring.
Theatricality. A Charismatic is larger than life, has extra presence. Actors
have studied this kind of presence for centuries; they know how to stand
on a crowded stage and command attention. Surprisingly, it is not the actor
who screams the loudest or gestures the most wildly who works this magic
best, but the actor who stays calm, radiating self-assurance. The effect is
ruined by trying too hard. It is essential to be self-aware, to have the ability
to see yourself as others see you. De Gaulle understood that self-awareness
was key to his charisma; in the most turbulent circumstances—the Nazi
occupation of France, the national reconstruction after World War II,
an army rebellion in Algeria—he retained an Olympian composure that
played beautifully against the hysteria of his colleagues. When he spoke, no
one could take their eyes off him. Once you know how to command at-
tention this way, heighten the effect by appearing in ceremonial and ritual
events that are full of exciting imagery, making you look regal and godlike.
Flamboyancy has nothing to do with charisma—it attracts the wrong kind
of attention.
Uninhibitedness. Most people are repressed, and have little access to their
unconscious—a problem that creates opportunities for the Charismatic,
who can become a kind of screen on which others project their secret fan-
tasies and longings. You will first have to show that you are less inhibited
than your audience—that you radiate a dangerous sexuality, have no fear of
death, are delightfully spontaneous. Even a hint of these qualities will make
people think you more powerful than you are. In the 1850s a bohemian
American actress, Adah Isaacs Menken, took the world by storm through
her unbridled sexual energy, and her fearlessness. She would appear on
stage half-naked, performing death-defying acts; few women could dare
such things in the Victorian period, and a rather mediocre actress became a
figure of cultlike adoration.
An extension of your being uninhibited is a dreamlike quality in your
work and character that reveals your openness to your unconscious. It was
the possession of this quality that transformed artists like Wagner and Pi-
casso into charismatic idols. Its cousin is a fluidity of body and spirit; while
the repressed are rigid, Charismatics have an ease and an adaptability that
show their openness to experience.
