Seductive Oratory
On May 13, 1958, right-wing Frenchmen and their sympathizers in the
army seized control of Algeria, which was then a French colony.
They had been afraid that France's socialist government would grant Alge-
ria its independence. Now, with Algeria under their control, they threat-
ened to take over all of France. Civil war seemed imminent.
At this dire moment all eyes turned to General Charles de Gaulle, the
World War II hero who had played a crucial role in liberating France from
the Nazis. For the last ten years de Gaulle had stayed away from politics, dis-
gusted with the infighting among the various parties. He remained very
popular, and was generally seen as the one man who could unite the country,
but he was also a conservative, and the right-wingers felt certain that if he
came to power he would support their cause. Days after the May 13 coup,
the French government—the Fourth Republic—collapsed, and the parlia-
ment called on de Gaulle to help form a new government, the Fifth Repub-
lic. He asked for and was granted full powers for four months. On June 4,
days after becoming the head of government, de Gaulle flew to Algeria.
The French colonials were ecstatic. It was their coup that had indirectly
brought de Gaulle to power; surely, they imagined, he was coming to thank
them, and to reassure them that Algeria would remain French. When he
arrived in Algiers, thousands of people filled the city's main plaza. The
mood was extremely festive—there were banners, music, and endless chants
of "Algérie française," the French-colonial slogan. Suddenly de Gaulle ap-
peared on a balcony overlooking the plaza. The crowd went wild. The
general, an extremely tall man, raised his arms above his head, and the
chanting doubled in volume. The crowd was begging him to join in. In-
stead he lowered his arms until silence fell, then opened them wide, and
slowly intoned, in his deep voice, "Je vous ai compris"—I have understood
you. There was a moment of quiet, and then, as his words sank in, a deaf-
ening roar: he understood them. That was all they needed to hear.
De Gaulle proceeded to talk of the greatness of France. More cheers.
He promised there would be new elections, and "with those elected repre-
sentatives we will see how to do the rest." Yes, a new government, just what
the crowd wanted—more cheers. He would "find the place for Algeria" in
the French "ensemble." There must be "total discipline, without qualifica-
tion and without conditions"—who could argue with that? He closed with
a loud call: "Vive la République! Vive la France!" the emotional slogan thatAfter Operation Sedition,
we are being treated to
Operation Seduction.
—MAURICE KRIEGEL-
VALRIMONT ON CHARLES DE
GAULLE, SHORTLY AFTER THE
GENERAL ASSUMED POWER
My mistress staged a lock-
out. . . . \ I went back to
verses and compliments, \
My natural weapons. Soft
words \ Remove harsh
door-chains. There's magic
in poetry, its power \ Can
pull down the bloody
moon, \ Turn bach the
sun, make serpents burst
asunder \ Or rivers flow
upstream. \ Doors are no
match for such
spellbinding, the toughest \
Locks can be opeu-sesamed
by its charms. \ But epic's a
dead loss for me. I'll get
nowhere with swift-footed \
Achilles, or with either of
Atreus' sons. \ Old what's-
his-name wasting twenty
years on war and travel, \
Poor Hector dragged in the
dust— \ No good. But
lavish fine words on some
young girl's profile \ And
sooner or later shell tender
herself as the fee, \ An
ample reward for your
253
254 • The Art of Seduction
had been the rallying cry in the fight against the Nazis. Everyone shouted it
back. In the next few days de Gaulle made similar speeches around Algeria,
to equally delirious crowds.
Only after de Gaulle had returned to France did the words of his
speeches sink in: not once had he promised to keep Algeria French. In fact
he had hinted that he might give the Arabs the vote, and might grant an
amnesty to the Algerian rebels who had been fighting to force the French
from the country. Somehow, in the excitement his words had created, the
colonists had failed to focus on what they had actually meant. De Gaulle
had duped them. And indeed, in the months to come, he worked to grant
Algeria its independence—a task he finally accomplished in 1962.
Interpretation. De Gaulle cared little about an old French colony, and
about what it symbolized to some French people. Nor did he have any
sympathy for anyone who fomented civil war. His one concern was to
make France a modern power. And so, when he went to Algiers, he had a
long-term plan: weaken the right-wingers by getting them to fight among
themselves, and work toward Algerian independence. His short-term goal
had to be to defuse the tension and buy himself some time. He would not
lie to the colonials by saying he supported their cause—that would cause
trouble back home. Instead he would beguile them with seductive oratory,
intoxicate them with words. His famous "I have understood you" could
easily have meant, "I understand what a danger you represent." But a jubi-
lant crowd expecting his support read it the way they wanted. To keep
them at a fever pitch, de Gaulle made emotional references—to the French
Resistance during World War II, for example, and to the need for "disci-
pline," a word with great appeal to right-wingers. He filled their ears with
promises—a new government, a glorious future. He got them to chant,
creating an emotional bond. He spoke with dramatic pitch and quivering
emotion. His words created a kind of delirium.
De Gaulle was not trying to express his feelings or speak the truth; he
was trying to produce an effect. This is the key to seductive oratory.
Whether you are talking to a single individual or to a crowd, try a little ex-
periment: rein in your desire to speak your mind. Before you open your
mouth, ask yourself a question: what can I say that will have the most
pleasant effect on my listeners? Often this entails flattering their egos,
assuaging their insecurities, giving them vague hopes for the future, sympa-
thizing with their travails ("I have understood you"). Start off with some-
thing pleasant and everything to come will be easy: people's defenses will
go down. They will grow amenable, open to suggestion. Think of your
words as an intoxicating drug that will make people emotional and con-
fused. Keep your language vague and ambiguous, letting your listeners fill
in the gaps with their fantasies and imaginings. Instead of tuning you out,
getting irritated or defensive, being impatient for you to shut up, they will
be pliant, happy with your sweet-sounding words.labors. So farewell, heroic \
Figures of legend—the
quid \ Pro quo you offer
won't tempt me. A bevy of
beauties \ All swooning
over my love-songs—that's
what I want.
—OVID, THE AMORES,
TRANSLATED BY PETER GREEN
When she has received a
letter, when its sweet
poison has entered her
blood, then a word is
sufficient to wake her love
burst forth. . . . My
personal presence will
prevent ecstasy. If I am
present only in a letter,
then she can easily cope
with me; to some extent,
she mistakes me for a more
universal creature who
dwells in her love. Then,
too, in a letter one can
more readily have free rein;
in a letter I can throw
myself at her feet in superb
fashion, etc.—something
that would easily seem like
nonsense if I did it in
person, and the illusion
would be lost. . . . • On
the whole, letters are and
will continue to be a
priceless means of making
an impression on a young
girl; the dead letter of
writing often has much
more influence than the
living word. A letter is a
secretive communication;
one is master of the
situation, feels no pressure
from anyone's actual
presence, and I do believe a
young girl would prefer to
be alone with her ideal.
—SØREN KIERKEGAARD,
THE SEDUCER'S DIARY,
TRANSLATED BY HOWARD V.
HONG AND EDNA H. HONG
