192 • The Art of Seduction
ing and attractive. Antiquity's other great seducer, Cleopatra, also sent out
mixed signals: by all accounts physically alluring, in voice, face, body, and
manner, she also had a brilliantly active mind, which for many writers of
the time made her seem somewhat masculine in spirit. These contrary
qualities gave her complexity, and complexity gave her power.
To capture and hold attention, you need to show attributes that go
against your physical appearance, creating depth and mystery. If you have a
sweet face and an innocent air, let out hints of something dark, even
vaguely cruel in your character. It is not advertised in your words, but in
your manner. The actor Errol Flynn had a boyishly angelic face and a slight
air of sadness. Beneath this outward appearance, however, women could
sense an underlying cruelty, a criminal streak, an exciting kind of danger-
ousness. This play of contrary qualities attracted obsessive interest. The
female equivalent is the type epitomized by Marilyn Monroe; she had
the face and voice of a little girl, but something sexual and naughty em-
anated powerfully from her as well. Madame Récamier did it all with her
eyes—the gaze of an angel, suddenly interrupted by something sensual and
flirtatious.
Playing with gender roles is a kind of intriguing paradox that has a long
history in seduction. The greatest Don Juans have had a touch of prettiness
and femininity, and the most attractive courtesans have had a masculine
streak. The strategy, though, is only powerful when the underquality is
merely hinted at; if the mix is too obvious or striking it will seem bizarre or
even threatening. The great seventeenth-century French courtesan Ninon
de l'Enclos was decidedly feminine in appearance, yet everyone who met
her was struck by a touch of aggressiveness and independence in her—but
just a touch. The late nineteenth-century Italian novelist Gabriele d'An-
nunzio was certainly masculine in his approaches, but there was a gentle-
ness, a consideration, mixed in, and an interest in feminine finery The
combinations can be juggled every which way: Oscar Wilde was quite
feminine in appearance and manner, but the underlying suggestion that he
was actually quite masculine drew both men and women to him.
A potent variation on this theme is the blending of physical heat and
emotional coldness. Dandies like Beau Brummel and Andy Warhol com-
bine striking physical appearances with a kind of coldness of manner, a dis-
tance from everything and everyone. They are both enticing and elusive,
and people spend lifetimes chasing after such men, trying to shatter their
unattainability. (The power of apparently unattainable people is devilishly
seductive; we want to be the one to break them down.) They also wrap
themselves in ambiguity and mystery, either talking very little or talking
only of surface matters, hinting at a depth of character you can never reach.
When Marlene Dietrich entered a room, or arrived at a party, all eyes in-
evitably turned to her. First there were her startling clothes, chosen to make
heads turn. Then there was her air of nonchalant indifference. Men, and
women too, became obsessed with her, thinking of her long after other
memories of the evening had faded. Remember: that first impression, thatwords; he examined her
sigh minutely, her farewell,
he whole behavior. . . But
since he was uncertain of
her motive—whether she
had acted from enmity or
love—he wavered in
perplexity. He wavered
in his thoughts now here,
now there. At one moment
he was off in one direction,
then suddenly in another,
till he had so ensnared
himself in the toils of his
own desire that he was
powerless to escape . . . •
His entanglement had
placed him in a quandary,
for he did not know
whether she wished him
well or ill; he could not
make out whether she
loved or hated him. No
hope or despair did he
consider which did not
forbid him either to advance
or retreat—hope and
despair led him to and fro
in unresolved dissension.
Hope spoke to him of love,
despair of hatred. Because
of this discord he could
yield his firm belief neither
to hatred nor yet to love.
Thus his feelings drifted in
an unsure haven—hope
bore him on, despair away.
He found no constancy in
either; they agreed neither
one way or another. When
despair came and told him
that his Blancheflor was
his enemy he faltered and
sought to escape: but at
once came hope, bringing
him her love, and a fond
aspiration, and so perforce
he remained. In the face of
such discord he did not
know where to turn: no-
where could he go forward.
The more he strove to flee,
the more firmly love forced
him back. The harder he
struggled to escape, love
drew him back more firmly.
—GOTTFRIED VON STRASSBURG,
TRISTAN, TRANSLATED BY A.T.
HATTO
Send Mixed Signals • 193
entrance, is critical. To show too much desire for attention is to signal inse-
curity, and will often drive people away; play it too cold and disinterested,
on the other hand, and no one will bother coming near. The trick is
to combine the two attitudes at the same moment. It is the essence of
coquetry.
Perhaps you have a reputation for a particular quality, which im-
mediately comes to mind when people see you. You will better hold their
attention by suggesting that behind this reputation some other quality lies
lurking. No one had a darker, more sinful reputation than Lord Byron.
What drove women wild was that behind his somewhat cold and disdainful
exterior, they could sense that he was actually quite romantic, even spiri-
tual. Byron played this up with his melancholic airs and occasional kind
deed. Transfixed and confused, many women thought that they could be
the one to lead him back to goodness, to make him a faithful lover. Once a
woman entertained such a thought, she was completely under his spell. It is
not difficult to create such a seductive effect. Should you be known as emi-
nently rational, say, hint at something irrational. Johannes, the narrator in
Kierkegaard's The Seducer's Diary, first treats the young Cordelia with
businesslike politeness, as his reputation would lead her to expect. Yet she
very soon overhears him making remarks that hint at a wild, poetic streak
in his character; and she is excited and intrigued.
These principles have applications far beyond sexual seduction. To hold
the attention of a broad public, to seduce them into thinking about you,
you need to mix your signals. Display too much of one quality—even if it
is a noble one, like knowledge or efficiency—and people will feel that you
lack humanity. We are all complex and ambiguous, full of contradictory
impulses; if you show only one side, even if it is your good side, you will
wear on people's nerves. They will suspect you are a hypocrite. Mahatma
Gandhi, a saintly figure, openly confessed to feelings of anger and venge-
fulness. John F. Kennedy, the most seductive American public figure of
modern times, was a walking paradox: an East Coast aristocrat with a love
of the common man, an obviously masculine man—a war hero—with a
vulnerability you could sense underneath, an intellectual who loved popu-
lar culture. People were drawn to Kennedy like the steel filings in Wilde's
fable. A bright surface may have a decorative charm, but what draws your
eye into a painting is a depth of field, an inexpressible ambiguity, a surreal
complexity.
