Friend to Lover
Anne Marie Louis d'Orléans, the Duchess de Montpensier, known in
seventeenth-century France as La Grande Mademoiselle, had never
known love in her life. Her mother had died when she was young; her fa-
ther remarried and ignored her. She came from one of Europe's most illus-
trious families: her grandfather had been King Henry IV; the future King
Louis XIV was her cousin. When she was young, matches had been pro-
posed between her and the widowed king of Spain, the son of the Holy
Roman emperor, and even cousin Louis himself, among many others. But
all of these matches were designed for political purposes, or because of her
family's enormous wealth. No one bothered to woo her; she rarely even
met her suitors. To make matters worse, the Grande Mademoiselle was an
idealist who believed in the old-fashioned values of chivalry: courage, hon-
esty, virtue. She loathed the schemers whose motives in courting her were
dubious at best. Whom could she trust? One by one she found a reason to
spurn them. Spinsterhood seemed to be her fate.
In April of 1669, the Grande Mademoiselle, then forty-two, met one
of the strangest men in the court: the Marquis Antonin Peguilin, later
known as the Duke de Lauzun. A favorite of Louis XIV's, the thirty-six-
year-old Marquis was a brave soldier with an acid wit. He was also an in-
curable Don Juan. Although he was short, and certainly not handsome, his
impudent manners and his military exploits made him irresistible to
women. The Grande Mademoiselle had noticed him some years before, ad-
miring his elegance and boldness. But it was only this time, in 1669, that
she had a real conversation with him, if a short one, and although she knew
of his lady-killer reputation, she found him charming. A few days later they
ran into each other again; this time the conversation was longer, and
Lauzun proved more intelligent than she had imagined—they talked of the
playwright Corneille (her favorite), of heroism, and of other elevated top-
ics. Now their encounters became more frequent. They had become
friends. Anne Marie noted in her diary that her conversations with Lauzun,
when they occurred, were the highlight of her day; when he was not at
court, she felt his absence. Surely her encounters with him came frequently
enough that they could not be accidental on his part, but he always seemed
surprised to see her. At the same time, she recorded feeling uneasy—
strange emotions were stealing up on her, she did not know why.
179Many women adore the
elusive, \ Hate
overeagerness. So, play
hard to get, \ Stop boredom
developing. And don't let
your entreaties \ Sound too
confident of possession.
Insinuate sex \
Camouflaged as friendship.
I've seen ultrastubborn
creatures \ Fooled by this
gambit, the switch from
companion to stud.
—OVID, THEART OF LOVE,
TRANSLATED BY PETER GREEN
On the street, I do not stop
her, or I exchange a
greeting with her but never
come close, but always
strive for distance.
Presumably our repeated
encounters are clearly
noticeable to her;
presumably she does
perceive that on her
horizon a new planet has
loomed, which in its course
has encroached disturbingly
upon hers in a curiously
undisturbing way, but
she has no inkling of the
law underlying this
movement. . . . Before I
begin my attack, I must
180 • The Art of Seduction
Time passed, and the Grande Mademoiselle was to leave Paris for a
week or two. Now Lauzun approached her without warning and made an
emotional plea to be considered her confidante, the great friend who
would execute any commission she needed done while she was away. He
was poetic and chivalrous, but what did he really mean? In her diary, Anne
Marie finally confronted the emotions that had been stirring in her since
their first conversation: "I told myself, these are not vague musings; there
must be an object to all of these feelings, and I could not imagine who it
was. . . . Finally, after troubling myself with this for several days, I realized
that it was M. de Lauzun whom I loved, it was he who had somehow
slipped into my heart and captured it."
Made aware of the source of her feelings, the Grande Mademoiselle
became more direct. If Lauzun was to be her confidante, she could talk to
him of marriage, of the matches that were still being offered to her. The
topic might give him a chance to express his feelings; perhaps he might
show jealousy. Unfortunately Lauzun did not seem to take the hint. In-
stead, he asked her why she was thinking of marriage at all—she seemed
so happy. Besides, who could possibly be worthy of her? This went
on for weeks. She could pry nothing personal out of him. In a way, she
understood—there were the differences in rank (she was far above him) and
age (she was six years older). Then, a few months later, the wife of the
king's brother died, and King Louis suggested to the Grande Mademoiselle
that she replace his late sister-in-law—that is, that she marry his brother.
Anne Marie was disgusted; clearly the brother was trying to get his hands
on her fortune. She asked Lauzun his opinion. As the king's loyal servants,
he replied, they must obey the royal wish. His answer did not please her,
and to make things worse, he stopped visiting her, as if it were no longer
proper for them to be friends. This was the last straw. The Grande Made-
moiselle told the king she would not marry his brother, and that was that.
Now Anne Marie met with Lauzun, and told him she would write on a
piece of paper the name of the man she had wanted to marry all along. He
was to put the paper under his pillow and read it the next morning. When
he did, he found the words "C'est vous"—It is you. Seeing the Grande
Mademoiselle the following evening, Lauzun said she must have been jok-
ing; she would make him the laughing stock of the court. She insisted that
she was serious. He seemed shocked, surprised—but not as surprised as the
rest of the court was a few weeks later, when an engagement was an-
nounced between this relatively low-ranking Don Juan and the second-
highest-ranking lady in France, a woman known for both her virtue and
her skill at defending it.
Interpretation. The Duke de Lauzun was one of the greatest seducers in
history, and his slow and steady seduction of the Grande Mademoiselle was
his masterpiece. His method was simple: indirection. Sensing her interest in
him in that first conversation, he decided to beguile her with friendship.first become acquainted
with her and her whole
mental state.
—SØREN KIERKEGAARD, THE
SEDUCER'S DIARY, TRANSLATED
BY HOWARD V. HONG AND
EDNA H. HONG
No sooner had he spoken
than the bullocks, driven
from their mountain
pastures, were on their way
to the beach, as Jove had
directed; they were making
for the sands where the
daughter [Europa] of the
great king used to play
with the young girls of
Tyre, who were her com-
panions. • . . . Aban-
doning the dignity of his
scepter, the father and ruler
of the gods, whose hand
wields the flaming three-
forked bolt, whose nod
shakes the universe,
adopted the guise of a bull;
and, mingling with the
other bullocks, joined in the
lowing and ambled in the
tender grass, a fair sight to
sec. His hide was white as
untrodden snow, snow not
yet melted by the rainy
South wind. The muscles
stood out on his neck, and
deep folds of skin hung
along his flanks. His horns
were small, it is true, but
so beautifully made that
you would swear they were
the work of an artist, more
polished and shining than
any jewel. There was no
menace in the set of his
head or in his eyes; he
looked completely placid. •
Agenor's daughter
[Europa] was filled with
admiration for one so
handsome and so friendly.
But, gentle though he
seemed, she was afraid at
first to touch him; then she
went closer, and held out
flowers to his shining lips.
The lover was delighted
