410 • The Art of Seduction
tures a democratizing, leveling impulse, in which everything has to seem at
least something like equal. An overt imbalance of power, an overt desire for
power, will stir envy and resentment; we learn to be kind and polite, at least
on the surface. Even those who have power generally try to act humble and
modest—they do not want to offend. In seduction, on the other hand, you
can throw all of that out, revel in your dark side, inflict a little pain—in
some ways be more yourself. Your naturalness in this respect will prove se-
ductive in itself. The problem is that after years of living in the real world,
we lose the ability to be ourselves. We become timid, humble, overpolite.
Your task is to regain some of your childhood qualities, to root out all this
false humility. And the most important quality to recapture is boldness.
No one is born timid; timidity is a protection we develop. If we never
stick our necks out, if we never try, we will never have to suffer the conse-
quences of failure or success. If we are kind and unobtrusive, no one will
be offended—in fact we will seem saintly and likable. In truth, timid peo-
ple are often self-absorbed, obsessed with the way people see them, and not
at all saintly. And humility may have its social uses, but it is deadly in seduc-
tion. You need to be able to play the humble saint at times; it is a mask you
wear. But in seduction, take it off. Boldness is bracing, erotic, and ab-
solutely necessary to bring the seduction to its conclusion. Done right, it
tells your targets that they have made you lose your normal restraint, and
gives them license to do so as well. People are yearning to have a chance to
play out the repressed sides of their personality. At the final stage of a se-
duction, boldness eliminates any awkwardness or doubts. In a dance, two
people cannot lead. One takes over, sweeping the other along. Seduction is
not egalitarian; it is not a harmonic convergence. Holding back at the end
out of fear of offending, or thinking it correct to share the power, is a
recipe for disaster. This is an arena not for politics but for pleasure. It can be
by the man or woman, but a bold move is required. If you are so con-
cerned about the other person, console yourself with the thought that
the pleasure of the one who surrenders is often greater than that of the
aggressor.
As a young man, the actor Errol Flynn was uncontrollably bold. This
often got him into trouble; he became too aggressive around desirable
women. Then, while traveling through the Far East, he became interested
in the Asian practice of tantric sex, in which the male must train himself
not to ejaculate, preserving his potency and heightening both partners'
pleasure in the process. Flynn later applied this principle to his seductions as
well, teaching himself to restrain his natural boldness and delay the end of
the seduction as long as possible. So, while boldness can work wonders, un-
controllable boldness is not seductive but frightening; you need to be able
to turn it on and off at will, know when to use it. As in Tantrism, you can
create more pleasure by delaying the inevitable.
In the 1720s, the Duc de Richelieu developed an infatuation with a
certain duchess. The woman was exceptionally beautiful, and was desired
by one and all, but she was far too virtuous to take a lover, although shethis great lady, who for the
time being was keeping her
bed, each did withdraw
apart for to entertain his
mistress. The one did
converse with the high-born
dame with every possible
respect and humble saluta-
tion and kissing of hands,
with words of honor and
stately compliment, without
making ever an attempt to
come near and try to force
the place. The other brother,
without any ceremony of
words or fine phrases, did
take his fair one to a
recessed window, and
incontinently making free
with her (for he was very
strong), he did soon show
her 'twas not his way to
love à l'espagnole, with
eyes and tricks of face and
words, but in the genuine
fashion and proper mode
every true lover should
desire. Presently having
finished his task, he doth
quit the chamber; but as he
goes, saith to his brother,
loud enough for his lady to
hear the words: "Do you
as I have done, brother
mine; else you do naught at
all. Be you as brave and
hardy as you will else-
where, yet if you show not
your hardihood here and
now, you are disgraced; for
here is no place of cere-
mony and respect, but one
where you do see your lady
before you, which doth but
wait your attack." So with
this he did leave his brother,
which yet for that while did
refrain him and put it off to
another time. But for this
the lady did by no means
esteem him more highly,
whether it was she did put
it down to an overchilliness
in love, or a lack of courage,
or a defect of bodily vigor.
—SEIGNEUR DE BRANTÔME,
LIVES OF FAIR & GALLANT
LADIES, TRANSLATED BY A. R.
ALLINSON
Master the Art of the Bold Move • 411
could be quite coquettish. Richelieu bided his time. He befriended her,
charming her with the wit that had made him the favorite of the ladies.
One night a group of such women, including the duchess, decided to play
a practical joke on him, in which he was to be forced naked out of his
room at the palace of Versailles. The joke worked to perfection, the ladies
all got to see him in his native glory, and had a good chuckle watching him
run away. There were many places Richelieu could have hidden; the place
he chose was the duchess's bedroom. Minutes later he watched her enter
and undress, and once the candles were extinguished, he crept into bed
with her. She protested, tried to scream. He covered her mouth with kisses,
and she eventually and happily relented. Richelieu had decided to make his
bold move then for several reasons. First, the duchess had come to like him,
and even to harbor a secret desire for him. She would never act upon it or
admit it, but he was certain it existed. Second, she had seen him naked, and
could not help but be impressed. Third, she would feel a touch of pity for
his predicament, and for the joke played on him. Richelieu, a consummate
seducer, would find no more perfect moment.
The bold move should come as a pleasant surprise, but not too much of
a surprise. Learn to read the signs that the target is falling for you. His or
her manner toward you will have changed—it will be more pliant, with
more words and gestures mirroring yours—yet there will still be a touch of
nervousness and uncertainty. Inwardly they have given in to you, but they
do not expect a bold move. This is the time to strike. If you wait too long,
to the point where they consciously desire and expect you to make a move,
it loses the piquancy of coming as a surprise. You want a degree of tension
and ambivalence, so that the move represents a great release. Their surren-
der will relieve tension like a long-awaited summer storm. Don't plan your
bold move in advance; it cannot seem calculated. Wait for the opportune
moment, as Richelieu did. Be attentive to favorable circumstances. This
will give you room to improvise and go with the moment, which will
heighten the impression you want to create of being suddenly over-
whelmed by desire. If you ever sense that the victim is expecting the bold
move, take a step back, lull them into a false sense of security, then strike.
Sometime in the fifteenth century, the writer Bandello relates, a young
Venetian widow had a sudden lust for a handsome nobleman. She had her
father invite him to their palace to discuss business, but during the meeting
the father had to leave, and she offered to give the young man a tour of the
place. His curiosity was piqued by her bedroom, which she described as the
most splendid room in the palace, but which she also passed by without let-
ting him enter. He begged to be shown the room, and she granted his wish.
He was spellbound: the velvets, the rare objets, the suggestive paintings, the
delicate white candles. A beguiling scent filled the room. The widow put
out all of the candles but one, then led the man to the bed, which had been
heated with a warming pan. He quickly succumbed to her caresses. Follow
the widow's example: your bold move should have a theatrical quality to it.
That will make it memorable, and make your aggressiveness seem pleasant,A man should proceed to
enjoy any woman when
she gives him an
opportunity and makes her
own love manifest to him
by the following signs: she
calls out to a man without
first being addressed by
him; she shows herself to
him in secret places; she
speaks to him tremblingly
and inarticulately; her face
blooms with delight and
her fingers or toes perspire;
and sometimes she remains
with both hands placed on
his body as if she had been
surprised by something, or
as if overcome with fatigue.
• After a woman has
manifested her love to him
by outward signs, and by
the motions of her body,
the man should make every
possible attempt to conquer
her. There should be no
indecision or hesitancy: if
an opening is found the
man should make the most •
of it. The woman, indeed,
becomes disgusted with the
man if he is timid about
his chances and throws
them away. Boldness is the
rule, for everything is to be
gained, and nothing lost.
—THE HINDU ART OF LOVE,
COLLECTED AND EDITED BY
EDWARD WINDSOR
