The Mesmerizing Effect
In December 1898, the wives of the seven major Western ambassadors to
China received a strange invitation: the sixty-three-year-old Empress
Dowager Tzu Hsi was hosting a banquet in their honor in the Forbidden
City in Beijing. The ambassadors themselves had been quite displeased
with the empress dowager, for several reasons. She was a Manchu, a race of
northerners who had conquered China in the early seventeenth century,
establishing the Ching Dynasty and ruling the country for nearly three
hundred years. By the 1890s, the Western powers had begun to carve up
parts of China, a country they considered backward. They wanted China
to modernize, but the Manchus were conservative, and resisted all reform.
Earlier in 1898, the Chinese Emperor Kuang Hsu, the empress dowager's
twenty-seven-year-old nephew, had actually begun a series of reforms,
with the blessings of the West. Then, one hundred days into this period of
reform, word reached the Western diplomats from the Forbidden City that
the emperor was quite ill, and that the empress dowager had taken power.
They suspected foul play; the empress had probably acted to stop the re-
forms. The emperor was being mistreated, probably poisoned—
perhaps he was already dead. When the seven ambassadors' wives were
preparing for their unusual visit, their husbands warned them: Do not trust
the empress dowager. A wily woman with a cruel streak, she had risen from
obscurity to become the concubine of a previous emperor and had man-
aged over the years to accumulate great power. Far more than the emperor,
she was the most feared person in China.
On the appointed day, the women were borne into the Forbidden City
in a procession of sedan chairs carried by court eunuchs in dazzling uni-
forms. The women themselves, not to be outdone, wore the latest Western
fashions—tight corsets, long velvet dresses with leg-of-mutton sleeves, bil-
lowing petticoats, tall plumed hats. The residents of the Forbidden City
looked at their clothes in amazement, and particularly at the way their
dresses displayed their prominent bosoms. The wives felt sure they had im-
pressed their hosts. At the Audience Hall they were greeted by princes and
princesses, as well as lower royalty. The Chinese women were wearing
magnificent Manchu costumes with the traditional high, jewel-encrusted
black headdresses; they were arranged in a hierarchical order reflected in
the color of their dresses, an astounding rainbow of color.
The wives were served tea in the most delicate porcelain cups, thenThe barge she sat in, like a
burnish'd throne, \Burn'd
on the water: the poop was
beaten gold; \ Purple the
sails, and so perfumed that
\ The winds were love-sick
with them; the oars were
silver, \ Which to the tune
of flutes kept stroke, and
made \ The water which
they beat to follow faster, \
As amorous of their
strokes. For her own
person, \ It beggar'd all
description: she did lie \ In
her pavilion—cloth-of-gold
of tissue— \ O'er picturing
that Venus where we see \
The fancy outwork nature:
on each side her \ Stood
pretty dimpled boys, like
smiling Cupids, \ With
divers-colour'd fans, whose
wind did seem \ To glow
the delicate cheeks which
they did cool, \ And
what they undid did. . . . \
Her gentlewomen, like the
Nereids, \ So many
mermaids, tended her i' the
eyes, \ And made their
bends adornings: at the
helm \ A seeming mermaid
steers: the silken tackle \
Swell with the touches of
those flower-soft hands \
That yarely frame the
office. From the barge \ A
strange invisible perfume
hits the sense \ Of the
267
268 • The Art of Seduction
were escorted into the presence of the empress dowager. The sight took
their breath away. The empress was seated on the Dragon Throne, which
was studded with jewels. She wore heavily brocaded robes, a magnificent
headdress bearing diamonds, pearls, and jade, and an enormous necklace of
perfectly matched pearls. She was a tiny woman, but on the throne, in that
dress, she seemed a giant. She smiled at the ladies with much warmth and
sincerity. To their relief, seated below her on a smaller throne was her
nephew the emperor. He looked pale, but he greeted them enthusiastically
and seemed in good spirits. Maybe he was indeed simply ill.
The empress shook the hand of each of the women. As she did so, an
attendant eunuch handed her a large gold ring set with a large pearl, which
she slipped onto each woman's hand. After this introduction, the wives
were escorted into another room, where they again took tea, and then were
led into a banqueting hall, where the empress now sat on a chair of yellow
satin—yellow being the imperial color. She spoke to them for a while; she
had a beautiful voice. (It was said that her voice could literally charm birds
out of trees.) At the end of the conversation, she took the hand of each
woman again, and with much emotion, told them, "One family—all one
family." The women then saw a performance in the imperial theater. Fi-
nally the empress received them one last time. She apologized for the per-
formance they had just seen, which was certainly inferior to what they
were used to in the West. There was one more round of tea, and this time,
as the wife of the American ambassador reported it, the empress "stepped
forward and tipped each cup of tea to her own lips and took a sip, then
lifted the cup on the other side, to our lips, and said again, 'One family—all
one family' " The women were given more gifts, then were escorted back
to their sedan chairs and borne out of the Forbidden City.
The women relayed to their husbands their earnest belief that they had
all been wrong about the empress. The American ambassador's wife re-
ported, "She was bright and happy and her face glowed with good will.
There was no trace of cruelty to be seen. . . . Her actions were full of free-
dom and warmth. . . . [We left] full of admiration for her majesty and
hopes for China." The husbands reported back to their governments: the
emperor was fine, and the empress could be trusted.
Interpretation. The foreign contingent in China had no idea what was
really happening in the Forbidden City. In truth, the emperor had con-
spired to arrest and possibly murder his aunt. Discovering the plot, a terri-
ble crime in Confucian terms, she forced him to sign his own abdication,
had him confined, and told the outside world that he was ill. As part of his
punishment, he was to appear at state functions and act as if nothing had
happened.
The empress dowager loathed Westerners, whom she considered bar-
barians. She disliked the ambassadors' wives, with their ugly fashions and
simpering ways. The banquet was a show, a seduction, to appease the West-adjacent wharfs. The city
cast \ Her people out upon
her; and Antony, \
Enthron'd i' the market-
place, did sit alone, \
Whistling to the air;
which, but for vacancy, \
Had gone to gaze on
Cleopatra too \ And made
a gap in nature.
—WILLIAM SHAKESPEARE,
ANTONY AND CLEOPATRA
In the palmy days of the
gay quarters at Edo there
was a connoisseur of
fashion named Sakakura
who grew intimate with the
great courtesan Chitose.
This woman was much
given to drinking sake; as
a side dish she relished the
so-called flower crabs, to be
found in the Mogami
River in the East, and
these she had pickled in
salt for her enjoyment.
Knowing this, Sakakura
commissioned a painter of
the Kano School to execute
her bamboo crest in
powdered gold on the tiny
shells of these crabs; he
fixed the price of each
painted shell at one
rectangular piece of gold,
and presented them to
Chitose throughout the
year, so that she never
lacked for them.
—IHARA SAIKAKU, THE LIFE OF
AN AMOROUS WOMAN, AND
OTHER WRITINGS, TRANSLATED
BY IVAN MORRIS
For such men as have
practised love, have ever
held this a sound maxim
that there is naught to be
compared with a woman in
her clothes. Again when
you reflect how a man doth
brave, rumple, squeeze and
make light of his lady's
finery, and how he doth
