Create Temptation • 233
She was not married, she had no child. Months after he had left her,
she had realized that she had been the victim of a consummate seducer. She
still loved Don Juan, but she was determined to turn the tables. Finding out
through a mutual friend that he had returned to Madrid, she took the five
thousand pesetas he had sent her and bought expensive clothes. She bor-
rowed a neighbor's child, asked the neighbor's cousin to play the child's
nursemaid, and rented a coach—all to create an elaborate fantasy that ex-
isted only in his mind. Cristeta did not even have to lie: she never actually
said she was married or had a child. She knew that being unable to have her
would make him want her more than ever. It was the only way to seduce a
man like him.
Overwhelmed by the lengths she had gone to, and by the emotions she
had so skillfully stirred in him, Don Juan forgave Cristeta and offered to
marry her. To his surprise, and perhaps to his relief, she politely declined.
The moment they married, she said, his eyes would wander elsewhere.
Only if they stayed as they were could she maintain the upper hand. Don
Juan had no choice but to agree.
Interpretation. Cristeta and Don Juan are characters in the novel Dulce y
Sabrosa (Sweet and Savory, 1891), by the Spanish writer Jacinto Octavio
Picon. Most of Picon's work deals with male seducers and their feminine
victims, a subject he studied and knew much about. Abandoned by Don
Juan, and reflecting on his nature, Cristeta decided to kill two birds with
one stone: she would get revenge and get him back. But how could she
lure such a man? The fruit once tasted, he no longer wanted it. What came
easily to him, or fell into his arms, held no allure for him. What would
tempt Don Juan into desiring Cristeta again, into pursuing her, was the
sense that she was already taken, that she was forbidden fruit. That was his
weakness—that was why he pursued virgins and married women, women
he was not supposed to have. To a man, she reasoned, the grass always
seems greener somewhere else. She would make herself that distant, allur-
ing object, just out of reach, tantalizing him, stirring up emotions he could
not control. He knew how charming and desirable she had once been to
him. The idea of possessing her again, and the pleasure he imagined it
would bring, were too much for him: he swallowed the bait.
Temptation is a twofold process. First you are coquettish, flirtatious;
you stimulate a desire by promising pleasure and distraction from daily life.
At the same time, you make it clear to your targets that they cannot have
you, at least not right away. You are establishing a barrier, some kind of
tension.
In days gone by such barriers were easy to create, by taking advantage
of preexisting social obstacles—of class, race, marriage, religion. Today the
barriers have to be more psychological: your heart is taken by someone
else; you are really not interested in the target; some secret holds you back;
the timing is bad; you are not good enough for the other person; the otherany tree of the garden'?"
And the woman said to the
serpent, "We may eat of
the fruit of the trees of the
garden; but God said,
'You shall not eat of the
fruit of the tree which is in
the midst of the garden,
neither shall you touch it,
lest you die.' " But the
serpent said to the woman,
"You will not die. For
God knows that when you
eat of it your eyes will be
opened, and you will be
like God, knowing good
and evil. " So when the
woman saw that the tree
was good for food, and that
it was a delight to the eyes,
and that the tree was to be
desired to make one wise,
she took of its fruit and
ate; and she also gave some
to her husband, and he ate.
—GENESIS 3:1 , OLD TESTAMENT
Thou strong seducer,
Opportunity.
—-JOHN DRYDEN
As he listened, Masetto
experienced such a longing
to go and stay with these
nuns that his whole body
tingled with excitement, for
it was clear from what he
had heard that he should
be able to achieve what he
had in mind. Realizing,
however, that he would get
nowhere by revealing his
intentions to Nuto, he
replied: • "How right you
were to come away from
the [nunnery]! What sort
of a life can any man lead
when he's surrounded by a
lot of women? He might as
well be living with a pack
of devils. Why, six times
out oj seven they don't
even know their own
minds." • But when they
234 • The Art of Seduction
person is not good enough for you; and so on. Conversely, you can choose
someone who has a built-in barrier: they are taken, they are not meant to
want you. These barriers are more subtle than the social or religious variety,
but they are barriers nevertheless, and the psychology remains the same.
People are perversely excited by what they cannot or should not have.
Create this inner conflict—there is excitement and interest, but you are
unavailable—and you will have them grasping like Tantalus for water. And
as with Don Juan and Cristeta, the more you make your targets pursue you,
the more they imagine that it is they who are the aggressors. Your seduc-
tion is perfectly disguised.
The only way to get rid of temptation is to yield to it.
—OSCAR WILDE.
Keys to Seduction
Most of the time, people struggle to maintain security and a sense of
balance in their lives. If they were always uprooting themselves in
pursuit of every new person or fantasy that passed them by, they could not
survive the daily grind. They usually win the struggle, but it does not come
easy. The world is full of temptation. They read about people who have
more than they do, about adventures others are having, about people who
have found wealth and happiness. The security that they strive for, and that
they seem to have in their lives, is actually an illusion. It covers up a con-
stant tension.
As a seducer, you can never mistake people's appearance for reality. You
know that their fight to keep order in their lives is exhausting, and that they
are gnawed by doubts and regrets. It is hard to be good and virtuous, always
having to repress the strongest desires. With that knowledge in mind, se-
duction is easier. What people want is not temptation; temptation happens
every day. What people want is to give into temptation, to yield. That is the
only way to get rid of the tension in their lives. It costs much more to resist
temptation than to surrender.
Your task, then, is to create a temptation that is stronger than the daily
variety. It has to be focused on them, aimed at them as individuals—at their
weakness. Understand: everyone has a principal weakness, from which oth-
ers stem. Find that childhood insecurity, that lack in their life, and you hold
the key to tempting them. Their weakness may be greed, vanity, boredom,
some deeply repressed desire, a hunger for forbidden fruit. They signal it in
little details that elude their conscious control: their style of clothing, an
offhand comment. Their past, and particularly their past romances, will be
littered with clues. Give them a potent temptation, tailored to their weak-
ness, and you can make the hope of pleasure that you stir in them figure
more prominently than the doubts and anxieties that accompany it.
In 1621, King Philip III of Spain desperately wanted to forge an al-had finished talking,
Masetto began to consider
what steps he ought to take
so that he could go and
stay with them. Knowing
himself to be perfectly
capable of carrying out the
duties mentioned by Nuto,
he had no worries about
losing the job on that
particular score, but he was
afraid lest he should be
turned down because of his
youth and his unusually
attractive appearance. And
so, having rejected a
number of other possible
expedients, he eventually
thought to himself: "The
convent is a long way off,
and there's nobody there
who knows me. If I can
pretend to be dumb, they'll
take me on for sure."
Clinging firmly to this
conjecture, he therefore
dressed himself in pauper's
rags and slung an ax over
his shoulder, and without
telling anyone where he
was going, he set out for
the convent. On his
arrival, he wandered into
the courtyard, where as
luck would have it he came
across the steward, and
with the aid of gestures
such as dumb people use,
he conveyed the impression
that he was begging for
something to eat, in return
for which he would attend
to any wood-chopping that
needed to be done. • The
steward gladly provided
him with something to eat,
after which he presented
him with a pile of logs that
Nuto had been unable to
chop. . . . Mow, when the
steward had discovered
what an excellent gardener
he was, he gestured to
Masetto, asking him
whether he would like to
stay there, and the latter
made signs to indicate that
he was willing to do
whatever the steward
