108 • The Art of Seduction
pressed by his firmness. Once, in the midst of a brewing riot, Lenin amazed
his chauffeur by jumping onto the running board of his car and directing
the way through the crowd, at considerable personal risk. Told that his ideas
had nothing to do with reality, he would answer, "So much the worse for
reality!"
Allied to Lenin's messianic confidence in his cause was his ability to or-
ganize. Exiled in Europe, his party had been scattered and diminished; in
keeping them together he had developed immense practical skills. In front
of a large crowd, he was a also powerful orator. His speech at the First All-
Russian Soviet Congress made a sensation; either revolution or a bourgeois
government, he cried, but nothing in between—enough of this compro-
mise in which the left was sharing. At a time when other politicians were
scrambling desperately to adapt to the national crisis, and seemed weak in
the process, Lenin was rock stable. His prestige soared, as did the member-
ship of the Bolshevik party
Most astounding of all was Lenin's effect on workers, soldiers, and peas-
ants. He would address these common people wherever he found them—in
the street, standing on a chair, his thumbs in his lapel, his speech an odd
mix of ideology, peasant aphorisms, and revolutionary slogans. They would
listen, enraptured. When Lenin died, in 1924—seven years after single-
handedly opening the way to the October Revolution of 1917, which had
swept him and the Bolsheviks into power—these same ordinary Russians
went into mourning. They worshiped at his tomb, where his body was
preserved on view; they told stories about him, developing a body of
Lenin folklore; thousands of newborn girls were christened "Ninel," Lenin
spelled backwards. This cult of Lenin assumed religious proportions.
There all kinds of misconceptions about charisma, which, paradoxically,
only add to its mystique. Charisma has little to do with an exciting physical
appearance or a colorful personality, qualities that elicit short—term interest.
Particularly in times of trouble, people are not looking for entertainment—
they want security, a better quality of life, social cohesion. Believe it or not,
a plain-looking man or woman with a clear vision, a quality of single-
mindedness, and practical skills can be devastatingly charismatic, provided it
is matched with some success. Never underestimate the power of success in
enhancing one's aura. But in a world teeming with compromisers and
fudgers whose indecisiveness only creates more disorder, one clear-minded
soul will be a magnet of attention—will have charisma.
One on one, or in a Zurich cafe before the revolution, Lenin had little
or no charisma. (His confidence was attractive, but many found his strident
manner irritating.) He won charisma when he was seen as the man who
could save the country. Charisma is not a mysterious quality that inhabits
you outside your control; it is an illusion in the eyes of those who see you
as having what they lack. Particularly in times of trouble, you can enhance
that illusion through calmness, resolution, and clear-minded practicality. It
also helps to have a seductively simple message. Call it the Savior Syn-No one could so fire others
with theif plans, no one
could so impose his will
and conquer by force of his
personality as this
seemingly so ordinary and
somewhat coarse man who
lacked any obvious sources
of charm. . . . Neither
Plekhanov nor Martov nor
anyone else possessed the
secret radiating from Lenin
of positively hypnotic effect
upon people—I would
even say, domination of
them. Plekhanov was
treated with deference,
Martov was loved, but
Lenin alone was followed
unhesitatingly as the only
indisputable leader. For
only Lenin represented that
rare phenomenon,
especially rare in Russia, of
a man of iron will and
indomitable energy who
combines fanatical faith in
the movement, the cause,
with no less faith in
himself.
—A. N. POTRESOV, QUOTED IN
DANKWART A. RUSTOW, ED.,
PHILOSOPHERS AND KINGS:
STUDIES IN LEADERSHIP
"I had hoped to see the
mountain eagle of our
party, the great man, great
physically as well as
politically. I had fancied
Lenin as a giant, stately
and imposing. Mow great
was my disappointment to
see a most ordinary-looking
man, below average height,
in no way, literally in no
way distinguishable from
ordinary mortals. "
—JOSEPH STALIN, ON MEETING
LENIN FOR THE FIRST TIME IN
1905, QUOTED IN RONALD W.
CLARK, LENIN:THE MAN
BEHIND THE MASK
The Charismatic • 109
drome: once people imagine you can save them from chaos, they will fall in
love with you, like a person who melts in the arms of his or her rescuer.
And mass love equals charisma. How else to explain the love ordinary Rus-
sians felt for a man as emotionless and unexciting as Vladimir Lenin.
The guru. According to the beliefs of the Theosophical Society, every two
thousand years or so the spirit of the World Teacher, Lord Maitreya, inhab-
its the body of a human. First there was Sri Krishna, born two thousand
years before Christ; then there was Jesus himself; and at the start of the
twentieth century another incarnation was due. One day in 1909, the
theosophist Charles Leadbeater saw a boy on an Indian beach and had an
epiphany: this fourteen-year-old lad, Jiddu Krishnamurti, would be the
World Teacher's next vehicle. Leadbeater was struck by the simplicity of
the boy, who seemed to lack the slightest trace of selfishness. The members
of the Theosophical Society agreed with his assessment and adopted this
scraggly underfed youth, whose teachers had repeatedly beaten him for stu-
pidity. They fed and clothed him and began his spiritual instruction. The
scruffy urchin turned into a devilishly handsome young man.
In 1911, the theosophists formed the Order of the Star in the East, a
group intended to prepare the way for the coming of the World Teacher.
Krishnamurti was made head of the order. He was taken to England, where
his education continued, and everywhere he went he was pampered and
revered. His air of simplicity and contentment could not help but impress.
Soon Krishnamurti began to have visions. In 1922 he declared, "I have
drunk at the fountain of Joy and eternal Beauty. I am God-intoxicated."
Over the next few years he had psychic experiences that the theosophists
interpreted as visits from the World Teacher. But Krishnamurti had actually
had a different kind of revelation: the truth of the universe came from
within. No god, no guru, no dogma could ever make one realize it. He
himself was no god or messiah, but just another man. The reverence that
he was treated with disgusted him. In 1929, much to his followers' shock,
he disbanded the Order of the Star and resigned from the Theosophical
Society.
And so Krishnamurti became a philosopher, determined to spread the
truth he had discovered: you must be simple, removing the screen of lan-
guage and past experience. Through these means anyone could attain con-
tentment of the kind that radiated from Krishnamurti. The theosophists
abandoned him but his following grew larger than ever. In California,
where he spent much of his time, the interest in him verged on cultic ado-
ration. The poet Robinson Jeffers said that whenever Krishnamurti entered
a room you could feel a brightness filling the space. The writer Aldous
Huxley met him in Los Angeles and fell under his spell. Hearing him
speak, he wrote: "It was like listening to the discourse of the Buddha—
such power, such intrinsic authority." The man radiated enlightenment.
The actor John Barrymore asked him to play the role of Buddha in a film.Tirst and foremost there
can be no prestige without
mystery, for familiarity
breeds contempt. ...In
the design, the demeanor
and the mental operations
of a leader there must
always be a "something"
which others cannot
altogether fathom, which
puzzles them, stirs them,
and rivets their
attention . . . to hold in
reserve some piece of secret
knowledge which may any
moment intervene, and the
more effectively from being
in the nature of a surprise.
The latent faith of the
masses will do the rest.
Once the leader has been
fudged capable of adding
the weight of his
personality to the known
factors of any situation, the
ensuing hope and
confidence will add
immensely to the faith
reposed in him.
—CHARLES DE GAULLE, THE
EDGE OF THE SWORD, IN DAVID
SCHOENBRUN, THE THREE
LIVES OF CHARLES DE GAULLE
