The Natural • 57
their impishness were uncontrollable, and thus natural. If you play the part,
do not worry about offending people now and then—you are too lovable
and inevitably they will forgive you. Just don't apologize or look contrite,
for that would break the spell. Whatever you say or do, keep a glint in your
eye to show that you do not take anything seriously.
The wonder. A wonder child has a special, inexplicable talent: a gift for
music, for mathematics, for chess, for sport. At work in the field in which
they have such prodigal skill, these children seem possessed, and their ac-
tions effortless. If they are artists or musicians, Mozart types, their work
seems to spring from some inborn impulse, requiring remarkably little
thought. If it is a physical talent that they have, they are blessed with un-
usual energy, dexterity, and spontaneity. In both cases they seem talented
beyond their years. This fascinates us.
Adult wonders are often former wonder children who have managed,
remarkably, to retain their youthful impulsiveness and improvisational skills.
True spontaneity is a delightful rarity, for everything in life conspires to rob
us of it—we have to learn to act carefully and deliberately, to think about
how we look in other people's eyes. To play the wonder you need some
skill that seems easy and natural, along with the ability to improvise. If in
fact your skill takes practice, you must hide this and learn to make your
work appear effortless. The more you hide the sweat behind what you do,
the more natural and seductive it will appear.
The undefensive lover. As people get older, they protect themselves against
painful experiences by closing themselves off. The price for this is that they
grow rigid, physically and mentally. But children are by nature unprotected
and open to experience, and this receptiveness is extremely attractive. In
the presence of children we become less rigid, infected with their open-
ness. That is why we want to be around them.
Undefensive lovers have somehow circumvented the self-protective
process, retaining the playful, receptive spirit of the child. They often
manifest this spirit physically: they are graceful, and seem to age less rapidly
than other people. Of all the Natural's character qualities, this one is the
most useful. Defensiveness is deadly in seduction; act defensive and you'll
bring out defensiveness in other people. The undefensive lover, on the
other hand, lowers the inhibitions of his or her target, a critical part of se-
duction. It is important to learn to not react defensively: bend instead of
resist, be open to influence from others, and they will more easily fall under
your spell.swaddling bands and
feigning sleep. "What an
absurd charge!" she cried.
But Apollo had already
recognized the hides. He
picked up Hermes, carried
him to Olympus, and there
formally accused him of
theft, offering the hides as
evidence. Zeus, loth to
believe that his own new-
born son was a thief
encouraged him to plead
not guilty, but Apollo
would not be put off and
Hermes, at last, weakened
and confessed. • "Very
well, come with me," he
said, "and you may have
your herd. I slaughtered
only two, and those I cut
up into twelve equal
portions as a sacrifice to the
twelve gods" • "Twelve
gods?" asked Apollo.
"Who is the twelfth?" •
"Your servant, sir" replied
Hermes modestly. "I ate
no more than my share,
though I was very hungry,
and duly burned the rest. "
• The two gods [ Hermes
and Apollo] returned to
Mount Cyllene, where
Hermes greeted his mother
and retrieved something
that he had hidden
underneath a sheepskin. •
"What have you there?"
asked Apollo. • In answer,
Hermes showed his newly-
invented tortoise-shell lyre,
and played such a
ravishing tune on it with
the plectrum he had also
invented, at the same time
singing in praise of
Apollo's nobility,
intelligence, and generosity,
that he was forgiven at
once. He led the surprised
and delighted Apollo to
Pylus, playing all the way,
and there gave him the
remainder of the cattle,
which he had hidden in a
cave. • "A bargain!" cried
Apollo. "You keep the
cows, and I take the lyre. "
58 • The Art of Seduction
Examples of Natural Seducers
1. As a child growing up in England, Charlie Chaplin spent years in dire
poverty, particularly after his mother was committed to an asylum. In his
early teens, forced to work to live, he landed a job in vaudeville, eventually
gaining some success as a comedian. But Chaplin was wildly ambitious, and
so, in 1910, when he was only nineteen, he emigrated to the United States,
hoping to break into the film business. Making his way to Hollywood, he
found occasional bit parts, but success seemed elusive: the competition was
fierce, and although Chaplin had a repertoire of gags that he had learned in
vaudeville, he did not particularly excel at physical humor, a critical part of
silent comedy. He was not a gymnast like Buster Keaton.
In 1914, Chaplin managed to get the lead in a film short called Making
a Living. His role was that of a con artist. In playing around with the cos-
tume for the part, he put on a pair of pants several sizes too large, then
added a derby hat, enormous boots that he wore on the wrong feet, a walk-
ing cane, and a pasted-on mustache. With the clothes, a whole new charac-
ter seemed to come to life—first the silly walk, then the twirling of the
cane, then all sorts of gags. Mack Sennett, the head of the studio, did not
find Making a Living very funny, and doubted whether Chaplin had a future
in the movies, but a few critics felt otherwise. A review in a trade magazine
read, "The clever player who takes the role of a nervy and very nifty
sharper in this picture is a comedian of the first water, who acts like one of
Nature's own naturals." And audiences also responded—the film made
money.
What seemed to touch a nerve in Making a Living, setting Chaplin apart
from the horde of other comedians working in silent film, was the almost
pathetic naiveté of the character he played. Sensing he was onto something,
Chaplin shaped the role further in subsequent movies, rendering him more
and more naive. The key was to make the character seem to see the world
through the eyes of a child. In The Bank, he is the bank janitor who day-
dreams of great deeds while robbers are at work in the building; in The
Pawnbroker, he is an unprepared shop assistant who wreaks havoc on a
grandfather clock; in Shoulder Arms, he is a soldier in the bloody trenches of
World War I, reacting to the horrors of war like an innocent child. Chaplin
made sure to cast actors in his films who were physically larger than he was,
subliminally positioning them as adult bullies and himself as the helpless in-
fant. And as he went deeper into his character, something strange hap-
pened: the character and the real-life man began to merge. Although he
had had a troubled childhood, he was obsessed with it. (For his film Easy
Street he built a set in Hollywood that duplicated the London streets he had
known as a boy.) He mistrusted the adult world, preferring the company of
the young, or the young at heart: three of his four wives were teenagers
when he married them.
More than any other comedian, Chaplin aroused a mix of laughter and
sentiment. He made you empathize with him as the victim, feel sorry for• "Agreed," said Hermes,
and they shook hands on
it. • . . . Apollo, taking
the child back to Olympus,
told Zeus all that had
happened. Zeus warned
Hermes that henceforth he
must respect the rights oj
property and refrain from
telling downright lies; but
he could not help being
amused. "You seem to be a
very ingenious, eloquent,
and persuasive godling," he
said. • "Then make me
your herald, Father,"
Hermes answered, "and I
will he responsible for the
safety of all divine
property, and never tell lies,
though I cannot promise
always to tell the whole
truth." • "That would not
be expected of you," said
Zeus with a smile. . . .
Zeus gave him a herald's
staff with white ribbons,
which everyone was ordered
to respect; a round hat
against the rain, and
winged golden sandals
which carried him about
with the swiftness of the
wind.
—ROBERT GRAVES,
THE GREEK MYTHS, VOLUME I
A man may meet a woman
and be shocked by her
ugliness. Soon, if she is
natural and unaffected, her
expression makes him
overlook the fault of her
features. He begins to find
her charming, it enters his
head that she might be
loved, and a week later he
is living in hope. The
following week he has been
snubbed into despair, and
the week afterwards he has
gone mad.
—STENDHAL, LOVE,
TRANSLATED BY GILBERT AND
SUZANNE SALE
