Disarm Through Strategic Weakness and Vulnerability • 291
saw something slightly feminine in him. Kennedy's weaknesses—physical
and mental, for he too was insecure, shy, and oversensitive—were exactly
what drew women to him. If Byron and Kennedy had tried to cover up
their vulnerabilities with a masculine swagger they would have had no
seductive charm. Instead, they learned how to subtly display their weak-
nesses, letting women sense this soft side to them.
There are fears and insecurities peculiar to each sex; your use of strate-
gic weakness must always take these differences into account. A woman, for
instance, may be attracted by a man's strength and self-confidence, but too
much of it can create fear, seeming unnatural, even ugly Particularly intimi-
dating is the sense that the man is cold and unfeeling. She may feel insecure
that he is only after sex, and nothing else. Male seducers long ago learned
to become more feminine—to show their emotions, and to seem interested
in their targets' lives. The medieval troubadours were the first to master this
strategy; they wrote poetry in honor of women, emoted endlessly about
their feelings, and spent hours in their ladies' boudoirs, listening to the
women's complaints and soaking up their spirit. In return for their willing-
ness to play weak, the troubadours earned the right to love.
Little has changed since then. Some of the greatest seducers in recent
history—Gabriele D' Annunzio, Duke Ellington, Errol Flynn—understood
the value of acting slavishly to a woman, like a troubadour on bended knee.
The key is to indulge your softer side while still remaining as masculine as
possible. This may include an occasional show of bashfulness, which the
philosopher Søren Kierkegaard thought an extremely seductive tactic for a
man—it gives the woman a sense of comfort, and even of superiority. Re-
member, though, to keep everything in moderation. A glimpse of shyness
is sufficient; too much of it and the target will despair, afraid that she will
end up having to do all the work.
A man's fears and insecurities often concern his sense of masculinity; he
usually will feel threatened by a woman who is too overtly manipulative,
who is too much in control. The greatest seductresses in history knew how
to cover up their manipulations by playing the little girl in need of mascu-
line protection. A famous courtesan of ancient China, Su Shou, used to
make up her face to look particularly pale and weak. She would also walk
in a way that made her seem frail. The great nineteenth-century courtesan
Cora Pearl would literally dress and act like a little girl. Marilyn Monroe
knew how to give the impression that she depended on a man's strength to
survive. In all of these instances, the women were the ones in control of
the dynamic, boosting a man's sense of masculinity in order to ultimately
enslave him. To make this most effective, a woman should seem both in
need of protection and sexually excitable, giving the man his ultimate
fantasy.
The Empress Josephine, wife of Napoleon Bonaparte, won dominance
over her husband early on through a calculated coquetry. Later on, though,
she held on to that power through her constant—and not so innocent—use
of tears. Seeing someone cry usually has an immediate effect on our emo-frigate, he was taken by the
Sicilian galleys, and carried
prisoner to the Castel-à-
mare at Palermo, where he
was shut up in an
exceeding narrow, dark and
wretched dungeon, and
very ill entreated by the
space of three months. By
good hap the Governor of
the Castle, who was a
Spaniard, had two very
fair daughters, who hearing
him complaining and
making moan, did one day
ask leave of their father to
visit him, for the honor of
the good God; and this he
did freely give them
permission to do. And
seeing the Captain was of
a surety a right gallant
gentleman, and as ready-
tongued as most, he was
able so to win them over at
this, the very first visit,
that they did gain their
father's leave for him to
quit his wretched dungeon
and to be put in a seemly
enough chamber and
receive better treatment.
Nor was this all, for they
did crave and get
permission to come and see
him freely every day and
converse with him. • And
this did fall out so well that
presently both the twain of
them were in love with
him, albeit he was not
handsome to look upon,
and they very fair ladies.
And so, without a thought
of the chance of more
rigorous imprisonment or
even death, but rather
tempted by such
opportunities, he did set
himself to the enjoyment of
the two girls with good will
and hearty appetite. And
these pleasures did continue
without any scandal, for so
fortunate was he in this
conquest of his for the space
of eight whole months, that
no scandal did ever hap all
that time, and no ill,
292 • The Art of Seduction
tions: we cannot remain neutral. We feel sympathy, and most often will do
anything to stop the tears—including things that we normally would not
do. Weeping is an incredibly potent tactic, but the weeper is not always so
innocent. There is usually something real behind the tears, but there may
also be an element of acting, of playing for effect. (And if the target senses
this the tactic is doomed.) Beyond the emotional impact of tears, there is
something seductive about sadness. We want to comfort the other person,
and as Tourvel discovered, that desire quickly turns into love. Affecting sad-
ness, even crying sometimes, has great strategic value, even for a man. It is a
skill you can learn. The central character of the eighteenth-century French
novel Marianne, by Marivaux, would think of something sad in her past to
make herself cry or look sad in the present.
Use tears sparingly, and save them for the right moment. Perhaps this
might be a time when the target seems suspicious of your motives, or when
you are worrying about having no effect on him or her. Tears are a sure
barometer of how deeply the other person is falling for you. If they seem
annoyed, or resist the bait, your case is probably hopeless.
In social and political situations, seeming too ambitious, or too con-
trolled, will make people fear you; it is crucial to show your soft side. The
display of a single weakness will hide a multitude of manipulations. Emo-
tion or even tears will work here too. Most seductive of all is playing the
victim. For his first speech in Parliament, Benjamin Disraeli prepared an
elaborate oration, but when he delivered it the opposition yelled and
laughed so loudly that hardly any of it could be heard. He plowed ahead
and gave the whole speech, but by the time he sat down he felt he had
failed miserably. Much to his amazement, his colleagues told him the
speech was a marvelous success. It would have been a failure if he had com-
plained or given up; but by going ahead as he did, he positioned himself as
the victim of a cruel and unreasonable faction. Almost everyone sympa-
thized with him now, which would serve him well in the future. Attacking
your mean-spirited opponents can make you seem ugly as well; instead,
soak up their blows, and play the victim. The public will rally to your side,
in an emotional response that will lay the groundwork for a grand political
seduction.
Symbol: The Blemish. A beautiful face is a delight to look at, but
if it is too perfect it leaves us cold, and even slightly intimidated.
It is the little mole, the beauty mark, that makes the face
human and lovable. So do not conceal all of your
blemishes. You need them to soften your
features and elicit tender
feelings.inconvenience, nor any
surprise or discovery at all.
For indeed the two sisters
had so good an under-
standing between them and
did so generously lend a
hand to each other and so
obligingly play sentinel to
one another, that no ill hap
did ever occur. And he
swore to me, being my very
intimate friend as he was,
that never in his days of
greatest liberty had he
enjoyed so excellent
entertainment or felt keener
ardor or better appetite for
it than in the said
prison—which truly was a
right good prison for him,
albeit folk say no prison
can be good. And this
happy time did continue for
the space of eight months,
till the truce was made
betwixt the Emperor and
Henri II., King of France,
whereby all prisoners did
leave their dungeons and
were released. He sware
that never was he more
grieved than at quitting
this good prison of his, but
was exceeding sorry to
leave these fair maids, with
whom he was in such high
favor, and who did express
all possible regrets at his
departing.
—SEIGNEUR DE BRANTÔME,
LIVES OF FAIR & GALLANT
LADIES, TRANSLATED BY A. R.
ALLINSON
