306 • The Art of Seduction
the queen was prepared not only to change this situation but actually to be-
friend him. The queen, said Lamotte-Valois, would indicate this in her
next formal reception—she would nod to him in a particular way.
During the reception, Rohan indeed noticed a slight change in the
queen's behavior toward him, and a barely perceptible glance at him. He
was overjoyed. Now the countess suggested they exchange letters, and Ro-
han spent days writing and rewriting his first letter to the queen. To his de-
light he received one back. Next the queen requested a private interview
with him in the gardens of Versailles. Rohan was beside himself with hap-
piness and anxiety. At nightfall he met the queen in the gardens, fell to the
ground, and kissed the hem of her dress. "You may hope that the past will
be forgotten," she said. At this moment they heard voices approaching, and
the queen, frightened that someone would see them together, quickly fled
with her servants. But Rohan soon received a request from her, again
through the countess: she desperately wanted to acquire the most beautiful
diamond necklace ever created. She needed a go-between to purchase it for
her, since the king thought it too expensive. She had chosen Rohan for the
task. The cardinal was only too willing; in performing this task he would
prove his loyalty, and the queen would be indebted to him forever. Rohan
acquired the necklace. The countess was to deliver it to the queen. Now
Rohan waited for the queen both to thank him and slowly to pay him
back.
Yet this never happened. The countess was in fact a grand swindler; the
queen had never nodded to him, he had only imagined it. The letters
he had received from her were forgeries, and not even very good ones. The
woman he had met in the park had been a prostitute paid to dress and act
the part. The necklace was of course real, but once Rohan had paid for it,
and handed it over to the countess, it disappeared. It was broken into parts,
which were hawked all over Europe for enormous amounts. And when
Rohan finally complained to the queen, news of the extravagant purchase
spread rapidly. The public believed Rohan's story—that the queen had in-
deed bought the necklace, and was pretending otherwise. This fiction was
the first step in the ruin of her reputation.
Everyone has lost something in life, has felt the pangs of disappoint-
ment. The idea that we can get something back, that a mistake can be
righted, is immensely seductive. Under the impression that the queen was
prepared to forgive some mistake he had made, Rohan hallucinated all
kinds of things—nods that did not exist, letters that were the flimsiest of
forgeries, a prostitute who became Marie Antoinette. The mind is infi-
nitely vulnerable to suggestion, and even more so when strong desires are
involved. And nothing is stronger than the desire to change the past, right a
wrong, satisfy a disappointment. Find these desires in your victims and cre-
ating a believable fantasy will be simple for you: few have the power to see
through an illusion they desperately want to believe in.
Confuse Desire and Reality—The Perfect Illusion • 307
Symbol: Shangri-La. Everyone has a vision in their mind of a
perfect place where people are kind and noble, where their
dreams can be realized and their wishes fulfilled, where life
is full of adventure and romance. Lead the target on a
journey there, give them a glimpse of Shangri-
La through the mists on the mountain,
and they will fall in love.
Reversal
There is no reversal to this chapter. No seduction can proceed without
creating illusion, the sense of a world that is real but separate from
reality.
