
Typology of the Anti-Seducers
Anti-Seducers come in many shapes and kinds, but almost all of them
share a single attribute, the source of their repellence: insecurity. We
are all insecure, and we suffer for it. Yet we are able to surmount these feel-
ings at times; a seductive engagement can bring us out of our usual self-
absorption, and to the degree that we seduce or are seduced, we feel
charged and confident. Anti-Seducers, however, are insecure to such a de-
gree that they cannot be drawn into the seductive process. Their needs,
their anxieties, their self-consciousness close them off. They interpret the
slightest ambiguity on your part as a slight to their ego; they see the merest
hint of withdrawal as a betrayal, and are likely to complain bitterly about it.
It seems easy: Anti-Seducers repel, so be repelled—avoid them. Unfor-
tunately, however, many Anti-Seducers cannot be detected as such at first
glance. They are more subtle, and unless you are careful they will ensnare
you in a most unsatisfying relationship. You must look for clues to their
self-involvement and insecurity: perhaps they are ungenerous, or they argue
with unusual tenacity, or are excessively judgmental. Perhaps they lavish
you with undeserved praise, declaring their love before knowing anything
about you. Or, most important, they pay no attention to details. Since they
cannot see what makes you different, they cannot surprise you with nu-
anced attention.
It is critical to recognize anti-seductive qualities not only in others but
also in ourselves. Almost all of us have one or two of the Anti-Seducer's
qualities latent in our character, and to the extent that we can consciously
root them out, we become more seductive. A lack of generosity, for in-
stance, need not signal an Anti-Seducer if it is a person's only fault, but an
ungenerous person is seldom truly attractive. Seduction implies opening
yourself up, even if only for the purposes of deception; being unable to
give by spending money usually means being unable to give in general.
Stamp ungenerosity out. It is an impediment to power and a gross sin in
seduction.
It is best to disengage from Anti-Seducers early on, before they sink
their needy tentacles into you, so learn to read the signs. These are the
main types.Count Lodovico then
remarked with a smile:
"I promise you that our
sensible courtier will never
act so stupidly to gain a
woman's favor." • Cesare
Gonzaga replied: "Nor so
stupidly as a gentleman I
remember, of some repute,
whom to spare men's
blushes I don't wish to
mention by name. " •
"Well, at least tell us what
he did," said the Duchess.
• Then Cesare continued:
"He was loved by a very
great lady, and at her
request he came secretly to
the town where she was.
After he had seen her and
enjoyed her company for as
long as she would let him
in the time, he sighed and
wept bitterly, to show the
anguish he was suffering at
having to leave her, and he
begged her never to forget
him; and then he added
that she should pay for his
lodging at the inn, since it
was she who had sent for
him and he thought it only
right, therefore, that he
shouldn't be involved in
any expense over the
journey." • At this, all the
133
