342 • The Art of Seduction
The next day he kept thinking about her words, her looks. Thinking
about her while he was teaching gave him a kind of naughty thrill. That
night he went back to the club, still determined to catch Lohmann in the
act, and once again found himself in Rosa's dressing room, drinking wine
and becoming strangely passive. She asked him to help her get dressed; that
seemed quite an honor and he obliged her. Helping her with her corset and
her makeup, he forgot about Lohmann. He felt he was being initiated into
some new world. She pinched his cheeks and stroked his chin, and occa-
sionally let him glimpse her bare leg as she rolled up a stocking.
Now Professor Mut showed up night after night, helping her dress,
watching her perform, all with a strange kind of pride. He was there so
often that Lohmann and his friends no longer showed up. He had taken
their place—he was the one to bring her flowers, pay for her champagne,
the one to serve her. Yes, an old man like himself had bested the youthful
Lohmann, who thought himself so suave! He liked it when she stroked his
chin, complimented him for doing things right, but he felt even more ex-
cited when she rebuked him, throwing a powder puff in his face or pushing
him off a chair. It meant she liked him. And so, gradually, he began to pay
for all her caprices. It cost him a pretty penny but kept her away from other
men. Eventually he proposed to her. They married, and scandal ensued: he
lost his job, and soon all his money; finally he landed in prison. To the very
end, however, he could never get angry with Rosa. Instead he felt guilty:
he had never done enough for her.
Interpretation. Professor Mut and Rosa Fröhlich are characters in the
novel The Blue Angel, written by Heinrich Mann in 1905, and later made
into a film starring Marlene Dietrich. Rosa's seduction of Mut follows the
classic oedipal regression pattern. First, the woman treats the man the way a
mother would treat a little boy. She scolds him, but the scolding is not
threatening; it is tender, and has a teasing edge. Like a mother, she knows
she is dealing with someone weak, who cannot help his naughty behavior.
She mixes plenty of praise and approval in with her taunts. Once the man
begins to regress, she adds physical excitement—some bodily contact to ex-
cite him, subtle sexual overtones. As a reward for his regression, the man may
get the thrill of finally sleeping with his mother. But there is always an ele-
ment of competition, which the mother figure must heighten. The man
gets to possess her all on his own, something he could not do with father in
the way, but he first has to win her away from others.
The key to this kind of regression is to see and treat your targets as chil-
dren. Nothing about them intimidates you, no matter how much authority
or social standing they have. Your manner makes it clear that you feel you
are the stronger party. To accomplish this it may be helpful to imagine or
visualize them as the children they once were; suddenly, powerful people
do not seem so powerful and threatening when you regress them in your
imagination. Keep in mind that certain types are more vulnerable to an
Effect a Regression • 343
oedipal regression. Look for those who, like Professor Mut, seem outwardly
the most adult—straitlaced, serious, a little full of themselves. They are
struggling to repress their regressive tendencies, overcompensating for their
weaknesses. Often those who seem the most in command of themselves are
the ripest for regression. In fact they are secretly longing for it, because their
power, position, and responsibilities are more a burden than a pleasure.
3. Born in 1768, the French writer François René de Chateaubriand grew
up in a medieval castle in Brittany. The castle was cold and gloomy, as if in-
habited by the ghosts of its past. The family lived there in semiseclusion.
Chateaubriand spent much of his time with his sister Lucile, and his attach-
ment to her was strong enough that rumors of incest made the rounds. But
when he was around fifteen, a new woman named Sylphide entered his
life—a woman he created in his imagination, a composite of all the hero-
ines, goddesses, and courtesans he had read about in books. He was con-
stantly seeing her features in his mind, and hearing her voice. Soon she was
taking walks with him, carrying on conversations. He imagined her inno-
cent and exalted, yet they would sometimes do things that were not so in-
nocent. He carried on this relationship for two whole years, until finally he
left for Paris, and replaced Sylphide with women of flesh and blood.
The French public, weary after the terrors of the 1790s, greeted
Chateaubriand's first books enthusiastically, sensing a new spirit in them.
His novels were full of windswept castles, brooding heroes, and passionate
heroines. Romanticism was in the air. Chateaubriand himself resembled
the characters in his novels, and despite his rather unattractive appearance,
women went wild over him—with him, they could escape their boring
marriages and live out the kind of turbulent romance he wrote about.
Chateaubriand's nickname was the Enchanter, and although he was mar-
ried, and an ardent Catholic, the number of his affairs increased with the
years. But he had a restless nature—he traveled to the Middle East, to the
United States, all over Europe. He could not find what he was looking for
anywhere, and not the right woman either: after the novelty of an affair
wore off, he would leave. By 1807 he had had so many affairs, and still felt
so unsatisfied, that he decided to retire to his country estate, called Vallée
aux Loups. He filled the place with trees from all over the world, trans-
forming the grounds into something out of one of his novels. There he
began to write the memoirs that he envisioned would be his masterpiece.
By 1817, however, Chateaubriand's life had fallen apart. Money prob-
lems had forced him to sell Vallée aux Loups. Almost fifty, he suddenly felt
old, his inspiration dried up. That year he visited the writer Madame de
Staël, who had been ill and was now close to death. He spent several days at
her bedside, along with her closest friend, Juliette Récamier. Madame Ré-
camier's affairs were infamous. She was married to a much older man, but
they had not lived together for some time; she had broken the hearts of the
most illustrious men in Europe, including Prince Metternich, the Duke of
