Keep Them in Suspense—What Comes Next? • 247
out new stories, without a feeling of anticipation, your seduction will die.
Keep stoking the fires night after night. Your targets must never know
what's coming next—what surprises you have in store for them. As with
King Shahriyar, they will be under your control for as long as you can keep
them guessing.
In 1765, Casanova met a young Italian countess named Clementina
who lived with her two sisters in a château. Clementina loved to read, and
had little interest in the men who swarmed around her. Casanova added
himself to their number, buying her books, engaging her in literary discus-
sions, but she was no less indifferent to him than she had been to them.
Then one day he invited the entire family on a little trip. He would not tell
them where they were going. They piled into the carriage, all the way try-
ing to guess their destination. A few hours later they entered Milan—what
joy, the sisters had never been there. Casanova led them to his apartment,
where three dresses had been laid out—the most magnificent dresses the
girls had ever seen. There was one for each of the sisters, he told them, and
the green one was for Clementina. Stunned, she put it on, and her face lit
up. The surprises did not stop—there was a delicious meal, champagne,
games. By the time they returned to the château, late in the evening,
Clementina had fallen hopelessly in love with Casanova.
The reason was simple: surprise creates a moment when people's de-
fenses come down and new emotions can rush in. If the surprise is pleasur-
able, the seductive poison enters their veins without their realizing it. Any
sudden event has a similar effect, striking directly at our emotions before
we get defensive. Rakes know this power well.
A young married woman in the court of Louis XV, in eighteenth-
century France, noticed a handsome young courtier watching her, first at
the opera, then in church. Making inquiries, she found it was the Duc de
Richelieu, the most notorious rake in France. No woman was safe from
this man, she was warned; he was impossible to resist, and she should avoid
him at all costs. Nonsense, she replied, she was happily married. He could
not possibly seduce her. Seeing him again, she laughed at his persistence.
He would disguise himself as a beggar and approach her in the park, or his
coach would suddenly come alongside hers. He was never aggressive, and
seemed harmless enough. She let him talk to her at court; he was charming
and witty, and even asked to meet her husband.
The weeks passed, and the woman realized she had made a mistake: she
looked forward to seeing the marquis. She had let down her guard. This
had to stop. Now she started avoiding him, and he seemed to respect her
feelings: he stopped bothering her. Then one day, weeks later, she was at
the country manor of a friend when the marquis suddenly appeared. She
blushed, trembled, walked away, but his unexpected appearance had caught
her unawares—it had pushed her over the edge. A few days later she be-
came another of Richelieu's victims. Of course he had set the whole thing
up, including the supposed surprise encounter.
Not only does suddenness create a seductive jolt, it conceals manipula-three years pass.] Now
during this time
Shahrazad had borne King
Shahriyar three sous. On
the thousand and first
night, when she had ended
the tale of Ma'aruf she
rose and kissed the ground
before him, saying: "Great
King, for a thousand and
one nights I have been
recounting to you the fables
of past ages and the
legends of ancient kings.
May I be so bold as to
crave a favor of your
majesty?" • The king
replied: "Ask, and it shall
be granted. " • Shahrazad
called out to the nurses,
saying: "Bring me my
children. " • . . . "Behold
these three [little boys]
whom Allah has granted to
us. For their sake I implore
you to spare my life. For if
you destroy the mother of
these infants, they will find
none among women to love
them as I would." • The
king embraced his three
sous, and his eyes filled
with tears as he answered:
"I swear by Allah,
Shahrazad, that you were
already pardoned before the
coming of these children.
I loved you because I
found you chaste and
tender, wise and eloquent.
May Allah bless you,
and bless your father and
mother, your ancestors,
and all your descendants.
O, Shahrazad, this
thousand and first night
is brighter for us than
the day!"
—TALES FROM THE THOUSAND
AND ONE NIGHTS, TRANSLATED
BY N.J. DAWOOD
248 • The Art of Seduction
tions. Appear somewhere unexpectedly, say or do something sudden, and
people will not have time to figure out that your move was calculated. Take
them to some new place as if it only just occurred to you, suddenly reveal
some secret. Made emotionally vulnerable, they will be too bewildered to
see through you. Anything that happens suddenly seems natural, and any-
thing that seems natural has a seductive charm.
Only months after arriving in Paris in 1926, Josephine Baker had com-
pletely charmed and seduced the French public with her wild dancing. But
less than a year later she could feel their interest wane. Since childhood she
had hated feeling out of control of her life. Why be at the mercy of the
fickle public? She left Paris and returned a year later, her manner com-
pletely altered—now she played the part of an elegant Frenchwoman, who
happened to be an ingenious dancer and performer. The French fell in love
again; the power was back on her side. If you are in the public eye, you
must learn from this trick of surprise. People are bored, not only with their
own lives but with people who are meant to keep them from being bored.
The minute they feel they can predict your next step, they will eat you
alive. The artist Andy Warhol kept moving from incarnation to incarna-
tion, and no one could predict the next one—artist, filmmaker, society
man. Always keep a surprise up your sleeve. To keep the public's attention,
keep them guessing. Let the moralists accuse you of insincerity, of having
no core or center. They are actually jealous of the freedom and playfulness
you reveal in your public persona.
Finally, you might think it wiser to present yourself as someone reliable,
not given to caprice. If so, you are in fact merely timid. It takes courage
and effort to mount a seduction. Reliability is fine for drawing people in,
but stay reliable and you stay a bore. Dogs are reliable, a seducer is not. If,
on the other hand, you prefer to improvise, imagining that any kind of
planning or calculation is antithetical to the spirit of surprise, you are mak-
ing a grave mistake. Constant improvisation simply means you are lazy, and
thinking only about yourself. What often seduces a person is the feeling
that you have expended effort on their behalf. You do not need to trumpet
this too loudly, but make it clear in the gifts you make, the little journeys
you plan, the little teases you lure people with. Little efforts like these will
be more than amply rewarded by the conquest of the heart and willpower
of the seduced.
Symbol: The Roller Coaster.
The car rises slowly to the top, then suddenly hurtles you into
space, whips you to the side, throws you upside down, in every possible direction.
The riders laugh and scream. What thrills them is to let go, to grant control to someone else,
who propels them in unexpected directions. What new thrill awaits them around the next corner?
