
The Emotional Roller Coaster
One hot summer afternoon in 1894, Don Mateo Díaz, a thirty-eight-
year-old resident of Seville, decided to visit a local tobacco factory
Because of his connections Don Mateo was allowed to tour the place, but
his interest was not in the business side. Don Mateo liked young girls, and
hundreds of them worked in the factory. Just as he had expected, that day
many of them were in a state of near undress because of the heat—it was
quite a spectacle. He enjoyed the sights for a while, but the noise and the
temperature soon got to him. As he was heading for the door, though, a
worker of no more than sixteen called out to him: "Caballero, if you will
give me a penny I will sing you a little song."
The girl's name was Conchita Pérez, and she looked young and inno-
cent, in fact beautiful, with a sparkle in her eye that suggested a taste for ad-
venture. The perfect prey. He listened to her song (which seemed vaguely
suggestive), tossed her a coin that was equal to a month's salary, tipped his
hat, then left. It was never good to come on too strong too early. As he
walked along the street, he plotted how he would lure her into an affair.
Suddenly he felt a hand on his arm and he turned to see her walking along-
side him. It was too hot to work—would he be a gentleman and escort her
home? Of course. Do you have a lover? he asked her. No, she said, "I am
mozita"—pure, a virgin.
Conchita lived with her mother in a rundown part of town. Don Ma-
teo exchanged pleasantries, slipped the mother some money (he knew from
experience how important it was to keep the mother happy), then left. He
considered waiting a few days, but he was impatient, and returned the fol-
lowing morning. The mother was out. He and Conchita resumed their
playful banter from the day before, and to his surprise she suddenly sat in
his lap, put her arms around him, and kissed him. His strategy flying out
the window, he took hold of her and returned the kiss. She immediately
jumped up, her eyes flashing with anger: you are trifling with me, she said,
using me for a quick thrill. Don Mateo denied having any such intentions,
and apologized for going too far. When he left, he felt confused: she had
started it all; why should he feel guilty? And yet he did. Young girls can be
so unpredictable; it is best to break them in slowly
Over the next few days Don Mateo was the perfect gentleman. He
visited every day, showered mother and daughter with gifts, made no
advances—at least not at first. The damned girl had become so familiarThe more one pleases
generally, the less one
pleases profoundly.
—STENDHAL, LOVE,
TRANSLATED BY GILBERT AND
SUZANNE SALE
You should mix in the odd
rebuff \ With your cheerful
fun. Shut him out of the
house, let him wait there \
Cursing that locked front
door, let him plead \ And
threaten all he's a mind to.
Sweetness cloys the palate,
\ Bitter juice is a freshener.
Often a small skiff \ Is
sunk by favoring winds: it's
their husbands' access to
them, \ At will, that
deprives so many wives of
love. \ Let her put in a
door, with a hard-faced
porter to tell him \ "Keep
out," and he'll soon be
touched with desire \
Through frustration. Put
down your blunt foils, fight
with sharpened weapons \
(I don't doubt that my own
shafts \ Will be turned
against me). When a
new-captured lover \ Is
stumbling into the toils,
then let him believe \ He
alone has rights to your
bed—but later, make him
371
