Isolation—the Exotic Effect
In the early fifth century B.C., Fu Chai, the Chinese king of Wu, defeated
his great enemy, Kou Chien, the king of Yueh, in a series of battles. Kou
Chien was captured and forced to serve as a groom in Fu Chai's stables. He
was finally allowed to return home, but every year he had to pay a large
tribute of money and gifts to Fu Chai. Over the years, this tribute added
up, so that the kingdom of Wu prospered and Fu Chai grew wealthy
One year Kou Chien sent a delegation to Fu Chai: they wanted to
know if he would accept a gift of two beautiful maidens as part of the trib-
ute. Fu Chai was curious, and accepted the offer. The women arrived a few
days later, amid much anticipation, and the king received them in his
palace. The two approached the throne—their hair was magnificently coif-
fured, in what was called "the cloud-cluster" style, ornamented with pearl
ornaments and kingfisher feathers. As they walked, jade pendants hanging
from their girdles made the most delicate sound. The air was full of some
delightful perfume. The king was extremely pleased. The beauty of one of
the girls far surpassed that of the other; her name was Hsi Shih. She looked
him in the eye without a hint of shyness; in fact she was confident and co-
quettish, something he was not used to seeing in such a young girl.
Fu Chai called for festivities to commemorate the occasion. The halls
of the palace filled with revelers; inflamed with wine, Hsi Shih danced be-
fore the king. She sang, and her voice was beautiful. Reclining on a couch
of white jade, she looked like a goddess. The king could not leave her side.
The next day he followed her everywhere. To his astonishment, she was
witty, sharp, and knowledgeable, and could quote the classics better than he
could. When he had to leave her to deal with royal affairs, his mind was full
of her image. Soon he brought her with him to his councils, asking her ad-
vice on important matters. She told him to listen less to his ministers; he
was wiser than they were, his judgment superior.
Hsi Shih's power grew daily. Yet she was not easy to please; if the king
failed to grant some wish of hers, tears would fill her eyes, his heart would
melt, and he would yield. One day she begged him to build her a palace
outside the capital. Of course, he obliged her. And when he visited the
palace, he was astounded at its magnificence, even though he had paid
the bills: Hsi Shih had filled it with the most extravagant furnishings. The
grounds contained an artificial lake with marble bridges crossing over it. Fu
Chai spent more and more time here, sitting by a pool and watching HsiIn the state of Wu great
preparations had been
made for the reception of
the two beauties. The king
received them in audience
surrounded by his ministers
and all his court. As they
approached him the jade
pendants attached to their
girdles made a musical
sound and the air was
fragrant with the scent of
their gowns. Pearl
ornaments and kingfisher
feathers adorned their hair.
• Fu Chai, the king of
Wu, looked into the lovely
eyes of Hsi Shih
(495-472 B.C.) and
forgot his people and his
state. Now she did not
turn away and blush as she
had done three years
previously beside the little
brook. She was complete
mistress of the art of
seduction and she knew
how to encourage the king
to look again. Fu Chai
hardly noticed the second
girl, whose quiet charms
did not attract him. He
had eyes only for Hsi
Shih, and before the
audience was over those at
court realized that the girl
would be a force to be
reckoned with and that she
would be able to influence
311
312 • The Art of Seduction
Shih comb her hair, using the pool as a mirror. He would watch her play-
ing with her birds, in their jeweled cages, or simply walking through the
palace, for she moved like a willow in the breeze. The months went by; he
stayed in the palace. He missed councils, ignored his family and friends, ne-
glected his public functions. He lost track of time. When a delegation came
to talk to him of urgent matters, he was too distracted to listen. If anything
but Hsi Shih took up his time, he worried unbearably that she would be
angry.
Finally word reached him of a growing crisis: the fortune he had spent
on the palace had bankrupted the treasury, and the people were discon-
tented. He returned to the capital, but it was too late: an army from the
kingdom of Yueh had invaded Wu, and had reached the capital. All was
lost. Fu Chai had no time to rejoin his beloved Hsi Shih. Instead of letting
himself be captured by the king of Yueh, the man who had once served in
his stables, he committed suicide.
Little did he know that Kou Chien had plotted this invasion for years,
and that Hsi Shih's elaborate seduction was the main part of his plan.
Interpretation. Kou Chien wanted to make sure that his invasion of Wu
would not fail. His enemy was not Fu Chai's armies, or his wealth and his
resources, but his mind. If he could be deeply distracted, his mind filled
with something other than affairs of state, he would fall like ripe fruit.
Kou Chien found the most beautiful maiden in his realm. For three
years he had her trained in all of the arts—not just singing, dancing, and
calligraphy, but how to dress, how to talk, how to play the coquette. And it
worked: Hsi Shih did not allow Fu Chai a moment's rest. Everything about
her was exotic and unfamiliar. The more attention he paid to her hair, her
moods, her glances, the way she moved, the less he thought about diplo-
macy and war. He was driven to distraction.
All of us today are kings protecting the tiny realm of our own lives,
weighed down by all kinds of responsibilities, surrounded by ministers and
advisers. A wall forms around us—we are immune to the influence of other
people, because we are so preoccupied. Like Hsi Shih, then, you must lure
your targets away, gently, slowly, from the affairs that fill their mind. And
what will best lure them from their castles is the whiff of the exotic. Offer
something unfamiliar that will fascinate them and hold their attention. Be
different in your manners and appearance, and slowly envelop them in this
different world of yours. Keep your targets off balance with coquettish
changes of mood. Do not worry that the disruption you represent is mak-
ing them emotional—that is a sign of their growing weakness. Most people
are ambivalent: on the one hand they feel comforted by their habits and
duties, on the other they are bored, and ripe for anything that seems exotic,
that seems to come from somewhere else. They may struggle or have
doubts, but exotic pleasures are irresistible. The more you can get themthe king either for good
or ill. ...• Amidst the
revelers in the halls of Wu,
Hsi Shih wove her net
of fascination about the
heart of the susceptible
monarch. . . . "Inflamed
by wine, she now begins to
sing / The songs of Wu to
please the fatuous king; /
And in the dance of Tsu
she subtly blends /All
rhythmic movements to her
sensuous ends." . . . But
she could do more than
sing and dance to amuse
the king. She had wit, and
her grasp of politics
astonished him. When
there was anything she
wanted she could shed tears
which so moved her lover's
heart that he could refuse
her nothing. For she was,
as Fan Li had said, the
one and only, the
incomparable Hsi Shih,
whose magnetic personality
attracted everyone, many
even against their own
will. . . . • Embroidered
silk curtains encrusted with
coral and gems, scented
furniture and screens inlaid
with jade and mother-of-
pearl were among the
luxuries which surrounded
the favorite. . . . On one
of the hills near the palace
there was a celebrated pool
of clear water which has
been known ever since as
the pool of the king of
Wu. Here, to amuse her
lover, Hsi Shih would
make her toilet, using the
pool as a mirror while
the infatuated king combed
her hair. . . .
—ELOISE TALCOTT HIBBERT,
EMBROIDERED GAUZE:
PORTRAITS OR FAMOUS
CHINESE LADIES
