Use the Demonic Power of Words to Sow Confusion • 261
told how much wealth Caesar had left to the Roman people. This was the
coup de grace—the crowd turned against the conspirators and went off to
lynch them.
Antony was a clever man, who knew how to stir a crowd. According to
the Greek historian Plutarch, "When he saw that his oratory had cast a spell
over the people and that they were deeply stirred by his words, he began to
introduce into his praises [of Caesar] a note of pity and of indignation at
Caesar's fate." Seductive language aims at people's emotions, for emotional
people are easier to deceive. Antony used various devices to stir the crowd:
a tremor in his voice, a distraught and then an angry tone. An emotional
voice has an immediate, contagious effect on the listener. Antony also
teased the crowd with the will, holding off the reading of it to the end,
knowing it would push people over the edge. Holding up the cloak, he
made his imagery visceral.
Perhaps you are not trying to whip a crowd into a frenzy; you just want
to bring people over to your side. Choose your strategy and words carefully.
You might think it is better to reason with people, explain your ideas. But
it is hard for an audience to decide whether an argument is reasonable as
they listen to you talk. They have to concentrate and listen closely, which
requires great effort. People are easily distracted by other stimuli, and if
they miss a part of your argument, they will feel confused, intellectually in-
ferior, and vaguely insecure. It is more persuasive to appeal to people's
hearts than their heads. Everyone shares emotions, and no one feels inferior
to a speaker who stirs up their feelings. The crowd bonds together, every-
one contagiously experiencing the same emotions. Antony talked of Cae-
sar as if he and the listeners were experiencing the murder from Caesar's
point of view. What could be more provocative? Use such changes of per-
spective to make your listeners feel what you are saying. Orchestrate your
effects. It is more effective to move from one emotion to another than to
just hit one note. The contrast between Antony's affection for Caesar and
his indignation at the murderers was much more powerful than if he had
stayed with one feeling or the other.
The emotions you are trying to arouse should be strong ones. Do not
speak of friendship and disagreement; speak of love and hate. And it is cru-
cial to try to feel something of the emotions you are trying to elicit. You
will be more believable that way. This should not be difficult: imagine the
reasons for loving or hating before you speak. If necessary, think of some-
thing from your past that fills you with rage. Emotions are contagious; it is
easier to make someone cry if you are crying yourself. Make your voice an
instrument, and train it to communicate emotion. Learn to seem sincere.
Napoleon studied the greatest actors of his time, and when he was alone he
would practice putting emotion into his voice.
The goal of seductive speech is often to create a kind of hypnosis: you
are distracting people, lowering their defenses, making them more vulnera-
ble to suggestion. Learn the hypnotist's lessons of repetition and affirma-
tion, key elements in putting a subject to sleep. Repetition involves using
262 • The Art of Seduction
the same words over and over, preferably a word with emotional content:
"taxes," "liberals," "bigots." The effect is mesmerizing—ideas can be per-
manently implanted in people's unconscious simply by being repeated often
enough. Affirmation is simply the making of strong positive statements,
like the hypnotist's commands. Seductive language should have a kind of
boldness, which will cover up a multitude of sins. Your audience will be so
caught up in your bold language that they won't have time to reflect on
whether or not it is true. Never say "I don't think the other side made a
wise decision"; say "We deserve better," or "They have made a mess of
things." Affirmative language is active language, full of verbs, imperatives,
and short sentences. Cut out "I believe," "Perhaps," "In my opinion." Head
straight for the heart.
You are learning to speak a different kind of language. Most people
employ symbolic language—their words stand for something real, the feel-
ings, ideas, and beliefs they really have. Or they stand for concrete things in
the real world. (The origin of the word "symbolic" lies in a Greek word
meaning "to bring things together"—in this case, a word and something
real.) As a seducer you are using the opposite: diabolic language. Your words
do not stand for anything real; their sound, and the feelings they evoke, are
more important than what they are supposed to stand for. (The word "dia-
bolic" ultimately means to separate, to throw things apart—here, words and
reality.) The more you make people focus on your sweet-sounding lan-
guage, and on the illusions and fantasies it conjures, the more you diminish
their contact with reality. You lead them into the clouds, where it is hard to
distinguish truth from untruth, real from unreal. Keep your words vague
and ambiguous, so people are never quite sure what you mean. Envelop
them in demonic, diabolical language and they will not be able to focus on
your maneuvers, on the possible consequences of your seduction. And the
more they lose themselves in illusion, the easier it will be to lead them
astray and seduce them.
Symbol: The Clouds. In the clouds it is hard to see
the exact forms of things. Everything seems vague;
the imagination runs wild, seeing things that are
not there. Your words must lift people into
the clouds, where it is easy for them
to lose their way.
