Prove Yourself • 331
great numbers. She had a lover, a diplomat, and the thought that one man
had won her physical favors drove them all mad. Her male visitors began to
compete for her attention, writing poems in her honor, vying to become
her favorite. None of them succeeded, but they kept on trying.
Of course there were some who were offended by her, stating publicly
that she was no more than a high-class whore. They repeated the rumor
(perhaps true) that she had made older men dance while she played the
lute, and if their dancing pleased her, they could hold her in their arms. To
Tullia's faithful followers, all of noble birth, this was slander. They wrote a
document that was distributed far and wide: "Our honored mistress, the
well-born and honorable lady Tullia d'Aragona, doth surpass all ladies of
the past, present, or future by her dazzling qualities. . . . Anyone who re-
fuses to conform to this statement is hereby charged to enter the lists with
one of the undersigned knights, who will convince him in the customary
manner."
Tullia left Rome in 1535, going first to Venice, where the poet Tasso
became her lover, and eventually to Ferrara, which was then perhaps the
most civilized court in Italy. And what a sensation she caused there. Her
voice, her singing, even her poems were praised far and wide. She opened a
literary academy devoted to ideas of freethinking. She called herself a muse
and, as in Rome, a group of young men collected around her. They would
follow her around the city, carving her name in trees, writing sonnets in her
honor, and singing them to anyone who would listen.
One young nobleman was driven to distraction by this cult of adora-
tion: it seemed that everyone loved Tullia but no one received her love in
return. Determined to steal her away and marry her, this young man
tricked her into allowing him to visit her at night. He proclaimed his undy-
ing devotion, showered her with jewels and presents, and asked for her
hand. She refused. He pulled out a knife, she still refused, and so he stabbed
himself. He lived, but now Tullia's reputation was even greater than before:
not even money could buy her favors, or so it seemed. As the years went
by and her beauty faded, some poet or intellectual would always come to
her defense and protect her. Few of them ever pondered the reality: that
Tullia was indeed a courtesan, one of the most popular and well paid in the
profession.
Interpretation. All of us have defects of some sort. Some of these we are
born with, and cannot help. Tullia had many such defects. Physically she
was not the Renaissance ideal. Also, her mother had been a courtesan, and
she was illegitimate. Yet the men who fell under her spell did not care.
They were too distracted by her image—the image of an elevated woman,
a woman you would have to fight over to win. Her pose came straight out
of the Middle Ages, the days of knights and troubadours. Then, a woman,
most often married, was able to control the power dynamic between the
sexes by withholding her favors until the knight somehow proved his worthassurance of his love, the
fruit of which he enjoyed
from that time as fully as
he could desire.
—QUEEN MARGARET OF
NAVARRE, THE HEPTAMERON,
QUOTED IN THE VICE
ANTHOLOGY, EDITED BY
RICHARD DAVENPORT-HINES
A soldier lays siege to
cities, a lover to girls'
houses, \ The one assaults
city gates, the other front
doors. \ Love, like war, is a
toss-up. The defeated can
recover, \ While some you
might think invincible
collapse; \ So if you've got
love written off as an easy
option \ You'd better think
twice. Love calls \ For guts
and initiative. Great
Achilles sulks for Briseis—
\ Quick, Trojans, smash
through the Argive wall! \
Hector went into battle
from Andromache's
embraces \ Helmeted by his
wife. \ Agamemnon
himself, the Supremo, was
struck into raptures \ At
the sight of Cassandra's
tumbled hair; \ Even Mars
was caught on the job, felt
the blacksmith's meshes—
\ Heaven's best scandal in
years. Then take \ My own
case. I was idle, born to
leisure en deshabille, \
Mind softened by lazy
scribbling in the shade. \
But love for a pretty girl
soon drove the sluggard \
To action, made him join
up. \And just look at me
now—fighting fit, dead
keen on night exercises: \ If
you want a cure for
slackness, fall in love!
—OVID, THE AMORES,
TRANSLATED BY PETER GREEN
332 • The Art of Seduction
and the sincerity of his sentiments. He could be sent on a quest, or made
to live among lepers, or compete in a possibly fatal joust for her honor.
And this he had to do without complaint. Although the days of the trouba-
dour are long gone, the pattern remains: a man actually loves to be able to
prove himself, to be challenged, to compete, to undergo tests and trials and
emerge victorious. He has a masochistic streak; a part of him loves pain.
And strangely enough, the more a woman asks for, the worthier she seems.
A woman who is easy to get cannot be worth much.
Make people compete for your attention, make them prove themselves
in some way, and you will find them rising to the challenge. The heat of
seduction is raised by such challenges—show me that you really love me.
When one person (of either sex) rises to the occasion, often the other per-
son is now expected to do the same, and the seduction heightens. By mak-
ing people prove themselves, too, you raise your value and cover up your
defects. Your targets are too busy trying to prove themselves to notice your
blemishes and faults.
Symbol: The Tour-
nament. On the field, with its bright pennants
and caparisoned horses, the lady looks on as knights fight for
her hand. She has heard them declare love on bended knee, their
endless songs and pretty promises. They are all good at such things.
But then the trumpet sounds and the combat begins. In the tourna-
ment there can be no faking or hesitation. The knight she
chooses must have blood on his face, and a few
broken limbs.
Reversal
When trying to prove that you are worthy of your target, remember
that every target sees things differently. A show of physical prowess
will not impress someone who does not value physical prowess; it will just
show that you are after attention, flaunting yourself. Seducers must adapt
their way of proving themselves to the doubts and weaknesses of the se-
duced. For some, fine words are better proofs than daredevil deeds, particu-
larly if they are written down. With these people show your sentiments in
a letter—a different kind of physical proof, and one with more poetic ap-
peal than some showy bit of action. Know your target well, and aim your
seductive evidence at the source of their doubts or resistance.
