340 • The Art of Seduction
the writer's life, Juliette managed to hide him in a friend's house and
arranged for a false passport, a disguise, and safe passage to Brussels. Every-
thing went according to plan; Juliette joined him a few days later, carrying
his most valuable possessions. Clearly her heroic actions had won the con-
test for her.
And yet, after the novelty of Hugo's new life wore off, his affairs re-
sumed. Finally, fearing for his health, and worried that she could no longer
compete with yet another twenty-year-old coquette, Juliette made a calm
but stern demand: no more women or she was leaving him. Taken com-
pletely by surprise, yet certain that she meant every word, Hugo broke
down and sobbed. An old man by now, he got down on his knees and
swore, on the Bible and then on a copy of his famous novel Les Misérables,
that he would stray no more. Until Juliette's death, in 1883, her spell over
him was complete.
Interpretation. Hugo's love life was determined by his relationship with his
mother. He never felt she had loved him enough. Almost all the women he
had affairs with bore a physical resemblance to her; somehow he would
make up for her lack of love for him by sheer volume. When Juliette met
him, she could not have known all this, but she must have sensed two
things: he was extremely disappointed in his wife, and he had never really
grown up. His emotional outbursts and his need for attention made him
more a little boy than a man. She would gain ascendancy over him for the
rest of his life by supplying the one thing he had never had: complete, un-
conditional mother-love.
Juliette never judged Hugo, or criticized him for his naughty ways. She
lavished him with attention; visiting her was like returning to the womb. In
her presence, in fact, he was more a little boy than ever. How could he
refuse her a favor or ever leave her? And when she finally threatened to
leave him, he was reduced to the state of a wailing infant crying for his
mother. In the end she had total power over him.
Unconditional love is rare and hard to find, yet it is what we all crave,
since we either experienced it once or wish we had. You do not have to go
as far as Juliette Drouet; the mere hint of devoted attention, of accepting
your lovers for who they are, of meeting their needs, will place them in an
infantile position. A sense of dependency may frighten them a little, and
they may feel an undercurrent of ambivalence, a need to assert themselves
periodically, as Hugo did through his affairs. But their ties to you will be
strong and they will keep coming back for more, bound by the illusion that
they are recapturing the mother-love they had seemingly lost forever, or
never had.
2. Around the turn of the twentieth century, Professor Mut, a school-
master at a college for young men in a small German town, began to de-
Effect a Regression • 341
velop a keen hatred of his students. Mut was in his late fifties, and had
worked at the same school for many years. He taught Greek and Latin and
was a distinguished classical scholar. He had always felt a need to impose
discipline, but now it was getting ugly: the students were simply not inter-
ested in Homer anymore. They listened to bad music and only liked mod-
ern literature. Although they were rebellious, Mut considered them soft
and undisciplined. He wanted to teach them a lesson and make their lives
miserable; his usual way of dealing with their bouts of rowdiness was sheer
bullying, and most often it worked.
One day a student Mut loathed—a haughty, well-dressed young man
named Lohmann—stood up in class and said, "I can't go on working in this
room, Professor. There is such a smell of mud." Mud was the boys' nick-
name for Professor Mut. The professor seized Lohmann by the arm,
twisted it hard, then banished him from the room. He later noticed that
Lohmann had left his exercise book behind, and thumbing through it he
saw a paragraph about an actress named Rosa Fröhlich. A plot hatched in
Mut's mind: he would catch Lohmann cavorting with this actress, no doubt
a woman of ill repute, and would get the boy kicked out of school.
First he had to find out where she performed. He searched high and
low, finally finding her name up outside a club called the Blue Angel.
He went in. It was a smoke-filled place, full of the working-class types
he looked down on. Rosa was onstage. She was singing a song; the way she
looked everyone in the audience in the eye was rather brazen, but for some
reason Mut found this disarming. He relaxed a little, had some wine. After
her performance he made his way to her dressing room, determined to grill
her about Lohmann. Once there he felt strangely uncomfortable, but he
gathered up his courage, accused her of leading schoolboys astray, and
threatened to get the police to close the place down. Rosa, however, was
not intimidated. She turned all of Mut's sentences around: perhaps he was
the one leading boys astray. Her tone was cajoling and teasing. Yes,
Lohmann had bought her flowers and champagne—so what? No one had
ever talked to Mut this way before; his authoritative tone usually made peo-
ple give way. He should have felt offended: she was low class and a woman,
and he was a schoolmaster, but she was talking to him as if they were
equals. Instead, however, he neither got angry nor left—something com-
pelled him to stay.
Now she was silent. She picked up a stocking and started to darn it, ig-
noring him; his eyes followed her every move, particularly the way she
rubbed her bare knee. Finally he brought up Lohmann again, and the po-
lice. "You've no idea what this life's like," she said. "Everyone who comes
here thinks he's the only pebble on the beach. If you don't give them what
they want they threaten you with the police!" "I certainly regret having
hurt a lady's feelings," he replied sheepishly. As she got up from her chair,
their knees rubbed, and he felt a shiver up his spine. Now she was nice to
him again, and poured him some more wine. She invited him to come
back, then left abruptly to perform another number.
