
The Victim Strategy
That sweltering August in the 1770s when the Présidente de Tourvel
was visiting the château of her old friend Madame de Rosemonde,
leaving her husband at home, she was expecting to be enjoying the peace
and quiet of country life more or less on her own. But she loved the simple
pleasures, and soon her daily life at the château assumed a comfortable
pattern—daily Mass, walks in the country, charitable work in the neighbor-
ing villages, card games in the evening. When Madame de Rosemonde's
nephew arrived for a visit, then, the Présidente felt uncomfortable—but
also curious.
The nephew, the Vicomte de Valmont, was the most notorious liber-
tine in Paris. He was certainly handsome, but he was not what she had ex-
pected: he seemed sad, somewhat downtrodden, and strangest of all, he
paid hardly any attention to her. The Présidente was no coquette; she
dressed simply, ignored fashions, and loved her husband. Still, she was
young and beautiful, and was used to fending off men's attentions. In the
back of her mind, she was slightly perturbed that he took so little notice of
her. Then, at Mass one day, she caught a glimpse of Valmont apparently lost
in prayer. The idea dawned on her that he was in the midst of a period of
soul-searching.
As soon as word had leaked out that Valmont was at the château, the
Présidente had received a letter from a friend warning her against this dan-
gerous man. But she thought of herself as the last woman in the world to
be vulnerable to him. Besides, he seemed on the verge of repenting his evil
past; perhaps she could help move him in that direction. What a wonderful
victory that would be for God. And so the Présidente took note of Val-
mont's comings and goings, trying to understand what was happening in
his head. It was strange, for instance, that he would often leave in the
morning to go hunting, yet would never return with any game. One day,
she decided to have her servant do a little harmless spying, and she was
amazed and delighted to learn that Valmont had not gone hunting at all; he
had visited a local village, where he had doled out money to a poor family
about to be evicted from their home. Yes, she was right, his passionate soul
was moving from sensuality to virtue. How happy that made her feel.
That evening, Valmont and the Présidente found themselves alone for
the first time, and Valmont suddenly burst out with a startling confession.
He was head-over-heels in love with the Présidente, and with a love he hadThe weak ones do have a
power over us. The clear,
forceful ones I can do
without. I am weak and
indecisive by nature myself,
and a woman who is quiet
and withdrawn and follows
the wishes of a man even
to the point of letting
herself be used has much
the greater appeal. A man
can shape and mold her as
he wishes, and becomes
fonder of her all the while.
—MURASAKI SHIKIBU,
THE TALE OF GENJI,
TRANSLATED BY EDWARD G.
SEIDENSTICKER
Hera, daughter of Cronus
and Rhea, having been
born on the island of
Samos or, some say, at
Argos, was brought up in
Arcadia by Temenus, sou
of Pelasgus. The Seasons
were her nurses. After
banishing their father
Cronus, Hera's twin
brother Zeus sought her
out at Cnossus in Crete or,
some say, on Mount
Thornax (now called
Cuckoo Mountain) in
Argolis, where he courted
her, at first unsuccessfully.
She took pity on him only
when he adopted the
287
