140 • The Art of Seduction
because sexuality is repressed and requires speaking in code. It is rather be-
cause wordless communication (through clothes, gestures, actions) is the
most pleasurable, exciting, and seductive form of language.
In Crébillon fils's novel, Madame de Lursay is an ingenious seductress
who finds it exciting to initiate young men. But even she cannot overcome
the youthful stupidity of Meilcour, who is incapable of reading her signs
because he is absorbed in his own thoughts. Later in the story, she does
manage to educate him, but in real life there are many who cannot be
educated. They are too literal and insensitive to the details that contain
seductive power. They do not so much repel as irritate and infuriate you
by their constant misinterpretations, always viewing life from behind
the screen of their ego and unable to see things as they really are. Meilcour
is so caught up in himself he cannot see that Madame is expecting him to
make the bold move to which she will have to succumb. His hesitation
shows that he is thinking of himself, not of her; that he is worrying about
how he will look, not feeling overwhelmed by her charms. Nothing could
be more anti-seductive. Recognize such types, and if they are past the
young age that would give them an excuse, do not entangle yourself in
their awkwardness—they will infect you with doubt.
4. In the Heian court of late-tenth-century Japan, the young nobleman
Kaoru, purported son of the great seducer Genji himself, had had nothing
but misfortune in love. He had become infatuated with a young princess,
Oigimi, who lived in a dilapidated home in the countryside, her father
having fallen on hard times. Then one day he had an encounter with
Oigimi's sister, Nakanokimi, that convinced him she was the one he actu-
ally loved. Confused, he returned to court, and did not visit the sisters for
some time. Then their father died, followed shortly thereafter by Oigimi
herself.
Now Kaoru realized his mistake: he had loved Oigimi all along, and she
had died out of despair that he did not care for her. He would never meet
her like again; she was all he could think about. When Nakanokimi, her fa-
ther and sister dead, came to live at court, Kaoru had the house where
Oigimi and her family had lived turned into a shrine.
One day, Nakanokimi, seeing the melancholy into which Kaoru had
fallen, told him that there was a third sister, Ukifune, who resembled his
beloved Oigimi and lived hidden away in the countryside. Kaoru came to
life—perhaps he had a chance to redeem himself, to change the past. But
how could he meet this woman? There came a time when he visited the
shrine to pay his respects to the departed Oigimi, and heard that the myste-
rious Ukifune was there as well. Agitated and excited, he managed to catch
a glimpse of her through the crack in a door. The sight of her took his
breath away: although she was a plain-looking country girl, in Kaoru's eyes
she was the living incarnation of Oigimi. Her voice, meanwhile, was likehow it had fared with each.
Then the one which was
well content did reply she
was exceeding well, indeed
she was; indeed for the
nonce she could scarce be
better. The other, which
was ill content, did declare
for her part she had had to
do with the biggest fool and
most coward lover she had
ever seen; and all the time
the two gentlemen could
see them laughing together
as they walked and crying
out: "Oh! the silly fool!
the shamefaced poltroon
and coward!" At this the
successful gallant said to his
companion: "Hark to our
ladies, which do cry out at
you, and mock you sore.
You will find you have
overplayed the prude and
coxcomb this bout." So
much he did allow; but
there was no more time to
remedy his error, for
opportunity gave him
no other handle to seize
her by.
—SEIGNEUR DE BRANTÔME,
LIVES OF FAIR & GALLANT
LADIES, TRANSLATED BY A. R..
ALLINSON
The Anti-Seducer • 141
the voice of Nakanokimi, whom he had loved as well. Tears welled up in
his eyes.
A few months later Kaoru managed to find the house in the mountains
where Ukifune lived. He visited her there, and she did not disappoint. "I
once had a glimpse of you through a crack in a door," he told her, and
"you have been very much on my mind ever since." Then he picked her up
in his arms and carried her to a waiting carriage. He was taking her back to
the shrine, and the journey there brought back to him the image of
Oigimi; again his eyes clouded with tears. Looking at Ukifune, he silently
compared her to Oigimi—her clothes were less nice but she had beautiful
hair.
When Oigimi was alive, she and Kaoru had played the koto together,
so once at the shrine he had kotos brought out. Ukifune did not play as
well as Oigimi had, and her manners were less refined. Not to worry—he
would give her lessons, change her into a lady. But then, as he had done
with Oigimi, Kaoru returned to court, leaving Ukifune languishing at the
shrine. Some time passed before he visited her again; she had improved,
was more beautiful than before, but he could not stop thinking of Oigimi.
Once again he left her, promising to bring her to court, but more weeks
passed, and finally he received the news that Ukifune had disappeared, last
seen heading toward a river. She had most likely committed suicide.
At the funeral ceremony for Ukifune, Kaoru was wracked with guilt:
why had he not come for her earlier? She deserved a better fate.
Kaoru and the others appear in the eleventh-century Japanese novel The
Tale of Genji, by the noblewoman Murasaki Shikibu. The characters are
based on people the author knew, but Kaoru's type appears in every culture
and period: these are men and women who seem to be searching for an
ideal partner. The one they have is never quite right; at first glance a person
excites them, but they soon see faults, and when a new person crosses their
path, he or she looks better and the first person is forgotten. These types
often try to work on the imperfect mortal who has excited them, to im-
prove them culturally and morally. But this proves extremely unsatisfactory
for both parties.
The truth about this type is not that they are searching for an ideal
but that they are hopelessly unhappy with themselves. You may mistake
their dissatisfaction for a perfectionist's high standards, but in point of fact
nothing will really satisfy them, for their unhappiness is deep-rooted. You
can recognize them by their past, which will be littered with short-lived,
stormy romances. Also, they will tend to compare you to others, and to try
to remake you. You may not realize at first what you have gotten into, but
people like this will eventually prove hopelessly anti-seductive because they
cannot see your individual qualities. Cut the romance off before it happens.
These types are closet sadists and will torture you with their unreachable
goals.
