434 • Appendix A: Seductive Environment /Seductive Time
costumes—these heightened visuals, along with the story of the play, create
illusion. To produce this effect in real life, you must fashion your clothes,
makeup, and attitude to have a playful, artificial, edge—a feeling that you
have dressed for the pleasure of your audience. This is the goddesslike effect
of a Marlene Dietrich, or the fascinating effect of a dandy like Beau Brum-
mel. Your encounters with your targets should also have a sense of drama,
achieved through the settings you choose and through your actions. The
target should not know what will happen next. Create suspense through
twists and turns that lead to the happy ending; you are performing. When-
ever your targets meet you, they are returned to this vague feeling of being
in a play. You both have the thrill of wearing masks, of playing a different
role from the one your life has allotted you.
Use the visual language of pleasure. Certain kinds of visual stimuli signal
that you are not in the real world. You want to avoid images that have
depth, which might provoke thought, or guilt; instead, you should work in
environments that are all surface, full of glittering objects, mirrors, pools of
water, a constant play of light. The sensory overload of these spaces creates
an intoxicating, buoyant feeling. The more artificial, the better. Show your
targets a playful world, full of the sights and sounds that excite the baby or
child within them. Luxury—the sense that money has been spent or even
wasted—adds to the feeling that the real world of duty and morality has
been banished. Call it the brothel effect.
Keep it crowded or close. People crowding together raise the psychologi-
cal temperature to hothouse levels. Festivals and carnivals depend on the
contagious feeling a crowd creates. Bring your target to such environments
sometimes, to lower their normal defensiveness. Similarly, any kind of
situation that brings people together in a small space for a long period of
time is extremely conducive to seduction. For years, Sigmund Freud had a
small, tight-knit stable of disciples who attended his private lectures and
who engaged in an astonishing number of love affairs. Either lead the se-
duced into a crowded, festivallike environment or go trolling for targets in a
closed world.
Manufacture mystical effects. Spiritual or mystical effects distract people's
minds from reality, making them feel elevated and euphoric. From here it
is but a small step to physical pleasure. Use whatever props are at hand—
astrology books, angelic imagery, mystical-sounding music from some far-
off culture. The great eighteenth-century Austrian charlatan Franz Mesmer
filled his salons with harp music, the perfume of exotic incense, and a fe-
male voice singing in a distant room. On the walls he put stained glass and
Appendix A: Seductive Environment/Seductive Time • 435
mirrors. His dupes would feel relaxed, uplifted, and as they sat in the room
where he used magnets for their healing powers, they would feel a kind of
spiritual tingling pass from body to body. Anything vaguely mystical helps
block out the real world, and it is easy to move from the spiritual to the
sexual.
Distort their sense of time—speed and youth. Festival time has a kind of
speed and frenzy that make people feel more alive. Seduction should make
the heart beat faster, so that the seduced loses track of time passing. Take
them to places of constant activity and movement. Embark with them on
some kind of journey together, distracting their minds with new sights.
Youth may fade and disappear, but seduction brings the feeling of being
young, no matter the age of those involved. And youth is mostly energy.
The pace of the seduction must pick up at a certain moment, creating
a whirling effect in the mind. It is no wonder that Casanova did much of
his seducing at balls, or that the waltz was the preferred tool of many a
nineteenth-century rake.
Create moments. Everyday life is a drudgery in which the same actions
endlessly repeat. The festival, on the other hand, we remember as a mo-
ment when everything was transformed—when a little bit of eternity and
myth entered our lives. Your seduction must have such peaks, moments
when something dramatic happens and time is experienced differently.
You must give your targets such moments, whether by staging the seduc-
tion in a place—a carnival, a theater—where they naturally occur or by
creating them yourself, with dramatic actions that stir up strong emo-
tions. Those moments should be pure leisure and pleasure—no thoughts
of work or morality can intrude. Madame de Pompadour, the mistress of
King Louis XV, had to re-seduce her easily bored lover every few months;
intensely creative, she devised parties, balls, games, a little theater at Ver-
sailles. The seduced revels in affairs like this, sensing the effort you have ex-
pended to divert and enchant them.
Scenes from Seductive Time and Place
1. Around the year 1710, a young man whose father was a prosperous
wine dealer in Osaka, Japan, found himself daydreaming more and more.
He worked night and day for his father, and the burden of family life and
all of its duties was oppressive. Like every young man, he had heard of the
pleasure districts of the city—the quarters where the normally strict laws of
the shogunate could be violated. It was here that you would find the ukiyo,
the "floating world" of transient pleasures, a place where actors and courte-
