
Seductive Evidence
Anyone can talk big, say lofty things about their feelings, insist on how
much they care for us, and also for all oppressed peoples in the far
reaches of the planet. But if they never behave in a way that will back up
their words, we begin to doubt their sincerity—perhaps we are dealing
with a charlatan, or a hypocrite or a coward. Flattery and fine words can
only go so far. A time will eventually arrive when you will have to show
your victim some evidence, to match your words with deeds.
This kind of evidence has two functions. First, it allays any lingering
doubts about you. Second, an action that reveals some positive quality in
you is immensely seductive in and of itself. Brave or selfless deeds create a
powerful and positive emotional reaction. Don't worry, your deeds do not
have to be so brave and selfless that you lose everything in the process. The
appearance alone of nobility will often suffice. In fact, in a world where
people overanalyze and talk too much, any kind of action has a bracing, se-
ductive effect.
It is normal in the course of a seduction to encounter resistance. The
more obstacles you overcome, of course, the greater the pleasure that awaits
you, but many a seduction fails because the seducer does not correctly read
the resistances of the target. More often than not, you give up too easily.
First, understand a primary law of seduction: resistance is a sign that the
other person's emotions are engaged in the process. The only person you
cannot seduce is somebody distant and cold. Resistance is emotional, and
can be transformed into its opposite, much as, in jujitsu, the physical resis-
tance of an opponent can be used to make him fall. If people resist you be-
cause they don't trust you, an apparently selfless deed, showing how far you
are willing to go to prove yourself, is a powerful remedy. If they resist be-
cause they are virtuous, or because they are loyal to someone else, all the
better—virtue and repressed desire are easily overcome by action. As the
great seductress Natalie Barney once wrote, "Most virtue is a demand for
greater seduction."
There are two ways to prove yourself. First, the spontaneous action: a
situation arises in which the target needs help, a problem needs solving, or,
simply, he or she needs a favor. You cannot foresee these situations, but you
must be ready for them, for they can spring up at any time. Impress the tar-
get by going further than really necessary—sacrificing more money, more
time, more effort than they had expected. Your target will often use theseLove is a species of warfare.
Slack troopers, go
elsewhere! \ It takes more
than cowards to guard \
These standards. Night-
duty in winter, long-route
marches, every \ Hardship,
all forms of suffering: these
await \ The recruit who
expects a soft option.
You'll often be out in \
Cloudbursts, and bivouac
on the bare \ Ground. . . .
Is lasting \ Love your
ambition? Then put away
all pride. \ The simple,
straightforward way in may
be denied you, \ Doors
bolted, shut in your face —
\ So be ready to slip down
from the roof through a
lightwell, \ Or sneak in by
an upper-floor window.
She'll be glad \ To know
you 're risking your neck,
and for her sake: that will
offer \ Any mistress sure
proof of your love.
—OVID, THE ART OF LOVE,
TRANSLATED BY PETER GREEN
The man says: " . . . A
fruit picked from one's own
orchard ought to taste
sweeter than one obtained
from a stranger's tree, and
what has been attained by
323
