Disarm Through Strategic Weakness and Vulnerability • 289
happen, she left the château in the middle of the night, without telling
anyone, and headed for Paris, where she planned somehow to repent this
awful sin.
Interpretation. The character of Valmont in Choderlos de Laclos's
epistolary novel Dangerous Liaisons is based on several of the great real-life
libertines of eighteenth-century France. Everything Valmont does is calcu-
lated for effect—the ambiguous actions that make Tourvel curious about
him, the act of charity in the village (he knows he is being followed), the
return visit to the château, the paleness of his face (he is having an affair
with a girl at the château, and their all-night carousals give him a wasted
look). Most devastating of all is his positioning of himself as the weak one,
the seduced, the victim. How can the Présidente imagine he is manipulat-
ing her when everything suggests he is simply overwhelmed by her beauty,
whether physical or spiritual? He cannot be a deceiver when he repeatedly
makes a point of confessing the "truth" about himself: he admits that his
charity was questionably motivated, he explains why he has gone astray, he
lets her in on his emotions. (All of this "honesty," of course, is calculated.)
In essence he is like a woman, or at least like a woman of those times—
emotional, unable to control himself, moody, insecure. She is the one who
is cold and cruel, like a man. In positioning himself as Tourvel's victim, Val-
mont can not only disguise his manipulations but elicit pity and concern.
Playing the victim, he can stir up the tender emotions produced by a sick
child or a wounded animal. And these emotions are easily channeled into
love—as the Présidente discovers to her dismay.
Seduction is a game of reducing suspicion and resistance. The cleverest
way to do this is to make the other person feel stronger, more in control of
things. Suspicion usually comes out of insecurity; if your targets feel supe-
rior and secure in your presence, they are unlikely to doubt your motives.
You are too weak, too emotional, to be up to something. Take this game as
far as it will go. Flaunt your emotions and how deeply they have affected
you. Making people feel the power they have over you is immensely flatter-
ing to them. Confess to something bad, or even to something bad that you
did, or contemplated doing, to them. Honesty is more important than
virtue, and one honest gesture will blind them to many deceitful acts. Cre-
ate an impression of weakness—physical, mental, emotional. Strength and
confidence can be frightening. Make your weakness a comfort, and play
the victim—of their power over you, of circumstances, of life in general.
This is the best way to cover your tracks.
You know, a man ain't worth a damn if he can't cry at the
right time.
—LYNDON BAINES JOHNSONThe old American proverb
says if you want to con
someone, you must first get
him to trust you, or at least
feel superior to you (these
two ideas are related), and
get him to let down his
guard. The proverb
explains a great deal about
television commercials. If
we assume that people are
not stupid, they must react
to TV commercials with a
feeling of superiority that
permits them to believe
they are in control. As long
as this illusion of volition
persists, they would
consciously have nothing to
fear from the commercials.
People are prone to trust
anything over which they
believe they have
control. . . . • TV com-
mercials appear foolish,
clumsy, and ineffectual on
purpose. They are made to
appear this way at the
conscious level in order to
be consciously ridiculed and
rejected. . . . Most ad men
will confirm that over the
years the seemingly worst
commercials have sold the
best. An effective TV
commercial is purposefully
designed to insult the
viewer's conscious
intelligence, thereby
penetrating his defenses.
—WILSON BRYAN KEY,
SUBLIMINAL SEDUCTION
It takes great art to use
bashfulness, but one does
achieve a great deal with it.
How often I have used
bashfulness to trick a little
miss! Ordinarily, young
girls speak very harshly
about bashful men, but
secretly they like them. A
little bashfulness flatters a
teenage girl's vanity, makes
her feel superior; it is her
290 • The Art of Seduction
Keys to Seduction
We all have weaknesses, vulnerabilities, frailnesses in our mental
makeup. Perhaps we are shy or oversensitive, or need attention—
whatever the weakness is, it is something we cannot control. We may try to
compensate for it, or to hide it, but this is often a mistake: people sense
something inauthentic or unnatural. Remember: what is natural to your
character is inherently seductive. A person's vulnerability, what they seem
to be unable to control, is often what is most seductive about them. People
who display no weaknesses, on the other hand, often elicit envy, fear, and
anger—we want to sabotage them just to bring them down.
Do not struggle against your vulnerabilities, or try to repress them, but
put them into play. Learn to transform them into power. The game is sub-
tle: if you wallow in your weakness, overplay your hand, you will be seen as
angling for sympathy, or, worse, as pathetic. No, what works best is to allow
people an occasional glimpse into the soft, frail side of your character, and
usually only after they have known you for a while. That glimpse will hu-
manize you, lowering their suspicions, and preparing the ground for a
deeper attachment. Normally strong and in control, at moments you let go,
give in to your weakness, let them see it.
Valmont used his weakness this way. He had lost his innocence long
ago, and yet, somewhere inside, he regretted it. He was vulnerable to
someone truly innocent. His seduction of the Présidente was successful be-
cause it was not totally an act; there was a genuine weakness on his part,
which even allowed him to cry at times. He let the Présidente see this side
to him at key moments, in order to disarm her. Like Valmont, you can be
acting and sincere at the same time. Suppose you are genuinely shy—at cer-
tain moments, give your shyness a little weight, lay it on a little thick. It
should be easy for you to embellish a quality you already have.
After Lord Byron published his first major poem, in 1812, he became
an instant celebrity. Beyond being a talented writer, he was so handsome,
even pretty, and he was as brooding and enigmatic as the characters he
wrote about. Women went wild over Lord Byron. He had an infamous
"underlook," slightly lowering his head and glancing upward at a woman,
making her tremble. But Byron had other qualities: when you first met
him, you could not help noticing his fidgety movements, his ill-fitting
clothes, his strange shyness, and his noticeable limp. This infamous man,
who scorned all conventions and seemed so dangerous, was personally inse-
cure and vulnerable.
In Byron's poem Don Juan, the hero is less a seducer of women than a
man constantly pursued by them. The poem was autobiographical; women
wanted to take care of this somewhat fragile man, who seemed to have lit-
tle control over his emotions. More than a century later, John F. Kennedy,
as a boy, became obsessed with Byron, the man he most wanted to emulate.
He even tried to borrow Byron's "underlook." Kennedy himself was a frail
youth, with constant health problems. He was also a little pretty, and friendsearnest money. When they
are lulled to sleep, then at
the very time they believe
you are about to perish
from bashfulness, you show
them that you are so far
from it that you are quite
self-reliant. Bashfulness
makes a man lose his
masculine significance, and
therefore it is a relatively
good means for
neutralizing the sex
relation.
—SØREN KIERKEGAARD,
THE SEDUCER'S DIARY,
TRANSLATED BY HOWARD V.
HONG AND EDNA H. HONG
Yet another form of
Charity is there, which is
oft times practised towards
poor prisoners who are shut
up in dungeons and robbed
of all enjoyments with
women. On such do the
gaolers' wives and women
that have charge over them,
or chatelaines who have
prisoners of war in their
Castle, take pity and give
them share of their love out
of very charity and
mercifulness. . . . • Thus
do these gaolers' wives,
noble chatelaines and
others, treat their prisoners,
the which, captive and
unhappy though they be,
yet cease not for that to feel
the prickings of the flesh,
as much as ever they did in
their best days. . . . • To
confirm what I say, I will
instance a tale that
Captain Beaulieu,
Captain of the King's
Galleys, of whom I have
before spoke once and
again, did tell me. He was
in the service of the late
Grand Prior of France, a
member of the house of
Lorraine, who was much
attached to him. Going
one time to take his patron
on board at Malta in a
