452 • Appendix B: Soft Seduction: How to Sell Anything to the Masses
Free yourself from the need to communicate in the normal direct man-
ner and you will present yourself with greater opportunities for the soft
sell. Make the words you say unobtrusive, vague, alluring. And pay much
greater attention to your style, the visuals, the story they tell. Convey a
sense of movement and progress by showing yourself in motion. Express
confidence not through facts and figures but through colors and positive
imagery, appealing to the infant in everyone. Let the media cover you un-
guided and you are at their mercy. So turn the dynamic around—the press
needs drama and visuals? Provide them. It is fine to discuss issues or "truth"
as long as you package it entertainingly. Remember: images linger in the
mind long after words are forgotten. Do not preach to the public—that
never works. Learn to express your message through visuals that insinuate
positive emotions and happy feelings.
4. In 1919, the movie press agent Harry Reichenbach was asked to do ad-
vance publicity for a picture called The Virgin of Stamboul. It was the usual
romantic potboiler in an exotic locale, and normally a publicist would
mount a campaign with alluring posters and advertisements. But Harry
never operated the usual way. He had begun his career as a carnival barker,
and there the only way to get the public into your tent was to stand out
from the other barkers. So Harry dug up eight scruffy Turks whom he
found living in Manhattan, dressed them up in costumes (flowing sea-green
trousers, gold-crescented turbans) provided by the movie studio, rehearsed
them in every line and gesture, and checked them into an expensive hotel.
Word quickly spread to the newspapers (with a little help from Harry) that
a delegation of Turks had arrived in New York on a secret diplomatic
mission.
Reporters converged on the hotel. Since his appearance in New York
was clearly no longer a secret, the head of the mission, "Sheikh Ali Ben
Mohammed," invited them up to his suite. The newspapermen were im-
pressed by the Turks' colorful outfits, salaams, and rituals. The sheikh then
explained why he had come to New York. A beautiful young woman
named Sari, known as the Virgin of Stamboul, had been betrothed to the
sheikh's brother. An American soldier passing through had fallen in love
with her and had managed to steal her from her home and take her to
America. Her mother had died from grief. The sheikh had found out she
was in New York, and had come to bring her back.
Mesmerized by the sheikh's colorful language and by the romantic tale
he told, the reporters filled the papers with stories of the Virgin of Stam-
boul for the next several days. The sheikh was filmed in Central Park and
feted by the cream of New York society. Finally "Sari" was found, and the
press reported the reunion between the sheikh and the hysterical girl (an
actress with an exotic look). Soon after, The Virgin of Stamboul opened in
New York. Its story was much like the "real" events reported in the papers.
Was this a coincidence? A quickly made film version of the true story? No
Appendix B: Soft Seduction: How to Sell Anything to the Masses • 453
one seemed to know, but the public was too curious to care, and The Virgin
of Stamboul broke box office records.
A year later Harry was asked to publicize a film called The Forbidden
Woman. It was one of the worst movies he had ever seen. Theater owners
had no interest in showing it. Harry went to work. For eighteen days
straight he ran an ad in all of the major New York newspapers: WATCH THE
SKY ON THE NIGHT OF FEBRUARY 21ST! IF IT IS GREEN—GO THE CAPITOL IF
IT IS RED—GO THE RIVOLI IF IT IS PINK—GO TO THE STRAND IF IT IS BLUE—
GO TO THE RIALTO FOR ON FEBRUARY 21ST THE SKY WILL TELL YOU WHERE
THE BEST SHOW IN TOWN CAN BE SEEN! (The Capitol, the Rivoli, the
Strand, and the Rialto were the four big first-run movie houses on Broad-
way.) Almost everyone saw the ad and wondered what this fabulous show
was. The owner of the Capitol asked Harry if he knew anything about it,
and Harry let him in on the secret: it was all a publicity stunt for an un-
booked picture. The owner asked to see a screening of The Forbidden
Woman; through most of the film, Harry yakked about the publicity cam-
paign, distracting the man from the dullness onscreen. The theater owner
decided to show the film for a week, and so, on the evening of Febru-
ary 21, as a heavy snowstorm blanketed the city and all eyes turned to the
sky, giant rays of light poured out from the tallest buildings—a brilliant
show of green. An enormous crowd flocked to the Capitol theater. Those
who did not get in kept coming back. Somehow, with a packed house and
an excited crowd, the film did not seem quite so bad.
The following year Harry was asked to publicize a gangster picture
called Outside the Law. On high-ways across the country he set up billboards
that read, in giant letters, IF YOU DANCE ON SUNDAY, YOU ARE OUTSIDE THE
LAW. On other billboards the word "dance" was replaced by "play golf" or
"play pool" and so on. On a top corner of the billboards was a shield bear-
ing the initials "PD." The public assumed this meant "police department"
(actually, it stood for Priscilla Dean, the star of the movie) and that the
police, backed by religious organizations, were prepared to enforce
decades-old blue laws prohibiting "sinful" activities on a Sunday. Suddenly
a controversy was sparked. Theater owners, golfing associations, and dance
organizations led a countercampaign against the blue laws; they put up their
own billboards, exclaiming that if you did those things on Sunday, you
were not "OUTSIDE THE LAW" and issuing a call for Americans to have some
fun in their lives. For weeks the words "Outside the Law" were everywhere
seen and everywhere on people's lips. In the midst of this the film
opened—on a Sunday—in four New York theaters simultaneously, some-
thing that had never happened before. And it ran for months throughout
the country, also on Sundays. It was one of the big hits of the year.
Interpretation. Harry Reichenbach, perhaps the greatest press agent in
movie history, never forgot the lessons he had learned as a barker. The car-
nival is full of bright lights, color, noise, and the ebb and flow of the
