36 • The Art of Seduction
Love brings to light a lover's noble and hidden qualities—
his rare and exceptional traits: it is thus liable to be decep-
tive as to his normal character.
—FRIEDRICH NIETZSCHE
Keys to the Character
Each of us carries inside us an ideal, either of what we would like to be-
come, or of what we want another person to be for us. This ideal goes
back to our earliest years—to what we once felt was missing in our lives,
what others did not give to us, what we could not give to ourselves. Maybe
we were smothered in comfort, and we long for danger and rebellion. If we
want danger but it frightens us, perhaps we look for someone who seems at
home with it. Or perhaps our ideal is more elevated—we want to be more
creative, nobler, and kinder than we ever manage to be. Our ideal is some-
thing we feel is missing inside us.
Our ideal may be buried in disappointment, but it lurks underneath,
waiting to be sparked. If another person seems to have that ideal quality, or
to have the ability to bring it out in us, we fall in love. That is the response
to Ideal Lovers. Attuned to what is missing inside you, to the fantasy that
will stir you, they reflect your ideal—and you do the rest, projecting on to
them your deepest desires and yearnings. Casanova and Madame de Pom-
padour did not merely seduce their targets into a sexual affair, they made
them fall in love.
The key to following the path of the Ideal Lover is the ability to ob-
serve. Ignore your targets' words and conscious behavior; focus on the tone
of their voice, a blush here, a look there—those signs that betray what
their words won't say. Often the ideal is expressed in contradiction. King
Louis XV seemed to care only about chasing deer and young girls, but that
in fact covered up his disappointment in himself; he yearned to have his no-
bler qualities flattered.
Never has there been a better moment than now to play the Ideal
Lover. That is because we live in a world in which everything must seem
elevated and well-intentioned. Power is the most taboo topic of all: al-
though it is the reality we deal with every day in our struggles with people,
there is nothing noble, self-sacrificing, or spiritual about it. Ideal Lovers
make you feel nobler, make the sensual and sexual seem spiritual and aes-
thetic. Like all seducers, they play with power, but they disguise their ma-
nipulations behind the facade of an ideal. Few people see through them
and their seductions last longer.
Some ideals resemble Jungian archetypes—they go back a long way
in our culture, and their hold is almost unconscious. One such dream is
that of the chivalrous knight. In the courtly love tradition of the Middle
Ages, a troubadour/knight would find a lady, almost always a married one,
The Ideal Lover • 37
and would serve as her vassal. He would go through terrible trials on her
behalf, undertake dangerous pilgrimages in her name, suffer awful tortures
to prove his love. (This could include bodily mutilation, such as tearing off
of fingernails, the cutting of an ear, etc.) He would also write poems and
sing beautiful songs to her, for no troubadour could succeed without some
kind of aesthetic or spiritual quality to impress his lady. The key to the ar-
chetype is a sense of absolute devotion. A man who will not let matters of
warfare, glory, or money intrude into the fantasy of courtship has limitless
power. The troubadour role is an ideal because people who do not put
themselves and their own interests first are truly rare. For a woman to at-
tract the intense attention of such a man is immensely appealing to her
vanity.
In eighteenth-century Osaka, a man named Nisan took the courtesan
Dewa out walking, first taking care to sprinkle the clover bushes along the
path with water, which looked like morning dew. Dewa was greatly moved
by this beautiful sight. "I have heard," she said, "that loving couples of deer
are wont to lie behind clover bushes. How I should like to see this in real
life!" Nisan had heard enough. That very day he had a section of her house
torn down and ordered the planting of dozens of clover bushes in what had
once been a part of her bedroom. That night, he arranged for peasants to
round up wild deer from the mountains and bring them to the house. The
next day Dewa awoke to precisely the scene she had described. Once she
appeared overwhelmed and moved, he had the clover and deer taken away
and the house rebuilt.
One of history's most gallant lovers, Sergei Saltykov, had the misfortune
to fall in love with one of history's least available women: the Grand Duchess
Catherine, future empress of Russia. Catherine's every move was watched
over by her husband, Peter, who suspected her of trying to cheat on him
and appointed servants to keep an eye on her. She was isolated, unloved,
and unable to do anything about it. Saltykov, a handsome young army offi-
cer, was determined to be her rescuer. In 1752 he befriended Peter, and
also the couple in charge of watching over Catherine. In this way he was
able to see her and occasionally exchange a word or two with her that re-
vealed his intentions. He performed the most foolhardy and dangerous ma-
neuvers to be able to see her alone, including diverting her horse during a
royal hunt and riding off into the forest with her. He told her how much
he sympathized with her plight, and that he would do anything to help her.
To be caught courting Catherine would have meant death, and eventu-
ally Peter came to suspect that something was up between his wife and
Saltykov, though he was never sure. His enmity did not discourage the
dashing officer, who just put still more energy and ingenuity into finding
ways to arrange secret trysts. The couple were lovers for two years, and
Saltykov was undoubtedly the father of Catherine's son Paul, later the em-
peror of Russia. When Peter finally got rid of him by sending him off to
Sweden, news of his gallantry traveled ahead of him, and women swooned
