Effect a Regression • 331
them will regress to those earliest years when their mother took care of
everything and rarely left them alone. This works on almost everyone, for
unconditional love is the rarest and most treasured form. You do not even
have to tailor your behavior to anything specific in their childhood; most of
us have experienced this kind of attention. Meanwhile, create atmospheres
that reinforce the feeling you are generating—warm environments, playful
activities, bright, happy colors.
The Oedipal Regression. After the bond between mother and child
comes the oedipal triangle of mother, father, and child. This triangle forms
during the period of the child's earliest erotic fantasies. A boy wants his
mother to himself, a girl does the same with her father, but they never
quite have it that way, for a parent will always have competing connections
to a spouse or to other adults. Unconditional love has gone; now, inevita-
bly, the parent must sometimes deny what the child desires. Transport your
victims back to this period. Play a parental role, be loving, but also some-
times scold and instill some discipline. Children actually love a little
discipline—it makes them feel that the adult cares about them. And adult
children too will be thrilled if you mix your tenderness with a little tough-
ness and punishment.
Unlike infantile regression, oedipal regression must be tailored to your
target. It depends on the information you have gathered. Without knowing
enough, you might treat a person like a child, scolding them now and then,
only to discover that you are stirring up ugly memories—they had too
much discipline as child. Or you might stir up memories of a parent they
loathed, and they will transfer those feelings to you. Do not go ahead
with the regression until you have learned everything you can about their
childhood—what they had too much of, what they lacked, and so on. If
the target was strongly attached to a parent, but that attachment was par-
tially negative, the oedipal regression strategy can still be quite effective. We
always feel ambivalent toward a parent; even as we love them, we resent
having had to depend on them. Don't worry about stirring up these am-
bivalences, which don't keep us from being tied to our parents. Remember
to include an erotic component in your parental behavior. Now your tar-
gets are not only getting their mother or father all to themselves, they are
getting something more, something previously forbidden but now allowed.
The Ego Ideal Regression. As children, we often form an ideal figure out
of our dreams and ambitions. First, that ideal figure is the person we want
to be. We imagine ourselves as brave adventurers, romantic figures. Then,
in our adolescence, we turn our attention to others, often projecting our
ideals onto them. The first boy or girl we fall in love with may seem to
have the ideal qualities we wanted for ourselves, or else may make us feel
that we can play that ideal role in relation to them. Most of us carry thesewith their actual selves,
love is impossible. • The
transfer of the ego-ideal to
a person is the most
characteristic trait of love.
—THEODOR REIK, OF LOVE
AND LUST
I gave [Sylphide] the eyes
of one girl in the village,
the fresh complexion of
another. The portraits of
great ladies of the time of
Francis I, Henry IV, and
Louis XIV, hanging in our
drawing room, lent me
other features, and I even
borrowed beauties from the
pictures of the Madonna in
the churches. This magic
creature followed me
invisibly everywhere, I
conversed with her as if
with a real person; she
changed her appearance
according to the degree of
my madness; Aphrodite
without a veil, Diana
shrouded in azure and
rose, Thalia in a laughing
mask, Hebe with the goblet
of youth—or she became a
fairy, giving me dominion
over nature. . . . The
delusion lasted two whole
years, in the course of
which my soul attained the
highest peak of exaltation.
—CHATEAUBRIAND, MEMOIRS
FROM BEYOND THE GRAVE,
QUOTED IN FRIEDRICH SIEBURG,
CHATEAUBRIAND, TRANSLATED
BY VIOLET M. MACDONALD
338 • The Art of Seduction
ideals around with us, buried just below the surface. We are secretly disap-
pointed in how much we have had to compromise, how far below the ideal
we have fallen as we have gotten older. Make your targets feel they are liv-
ing out this youthful ideal, and coming closer to being the person they
wanted to be, and you will effect a different kind of regression, creating
a feeling reminiscent of adolescence. The relationship between you and
the seduced is in this instance more equal than in the previous kinds of
regressions—more like the affection between siblings. In fact the ideal is
often modeled on a brother or sister. To create this effect, strive to repro-
duce the intense, innocent mood of a youthful infatuation.
The Reverse Parental Regression. Here you are the one to regress: you
deliberately play the role of the cute, adorable, yet also sexually charged
child. Older people always find younger people incredibly seductive. In the
presence of youth, they feel a little of their own youth return; but they are
in fact older, and mixed into the invigoration they feel in young people's
company is the pleasure of playing the mother or father to them. If a child
has erotic feelings toward a parent, feelings that are quickly repressed, the
parent must deal with the same problem in reverse. Assume the role of the
child in relation to your targets, however, and they get to act out some of
those repressed erotic sentiments. The strategy may seem to call for a differ-
ence in age, but this is actually not critical. Marilyn Monroe's exaggerated
little-girl qualities worked just fine on men her age. Emphasizing a weak-
ness or vulnerability on your part will give the target a chance to play the
protector.
Some Examples
1. The parents of Victor Hugo separated shortly after the novelist was
born, in 1802. Hugo's mother, Sophie, had been carrying on an affair with
her husband's superior officer, a general. She took the three Hugo boys
away from their father and went off to Paris to raise them on her own.
Now the boys led a tumultuous life, featuring bouts of poverty, frequent
moves, and their mother's continued affair with the general. Of all the
boys, Victor was the most attached to his mother, adopting all her ideas and
pet peeves, particularly her hatred of his father. But with all the turmoil in
his childhood he never felt he got enough love and attention from the
mother he adored. When she died, in 1821, poor and debt-ridden, he was
devastated.
The following year Hugo married his childhood sweetheart, Adèle,
who physically resembled his mother. It was a happy marriage for a while,
but soon Adèle came to resemble his mother in more ways than one: in
1832, he discovered that she was having an affair with the French literary
critic Sainte-Beuve, who also happened to be Hugo's best friend at the
