222 • The Art of Seduction
swered, apparently somewhat abashed. One, however, was not enough, she
went on; she required several planes, and a helicopter, and her own per-
sonal pilot, a good one. He agreed to everything. The leader of Indonesia
seemed to be not just intimidated by Adams but totally under her spell. He
praised her intelligence and wit. At one point he confided, "Do you know
why I'm doing this biography? . . . Only because of you, that's why." He
paid attention to her clothes, complimenting her outfits, noticing any
change in them. He was more like a fawning suitor than the "Hitler of
Asia."
Inevitably, of course, he made passes at her. She was an attractive
woman. First there was the hand on top of her hand, then a stolen kiss. She
spurned him every time, making it clear she was happily married, but she
was worried: if all he had wanted was an affair, the whole book deal could
fall apart. Once again, though, her straightforward strategy seemed the
right one. Surprisingly, he backed down without anger or resentment. He
promised that his affection for her would remain platonic. She had to admit
that he was not at all what she had expected, or what had been described to
her. Perhaps he liked being dominated by a woman.
The interviews continued for several months, and she noticed slight
changes in him. She still addressed him familiarly, spicing the conversation
with brazen comments, but now he returned them, delighting in this kind
of saucy banter. He assumed the same lively mood that she strategically
forced on herself. At first he had dressed in military uniform, or in his Ital-
ian suits. Now he dressed casually, even going barefoot, conforming to the
casual style of their relationship. One night he remarked that he liked the
color of her hair. It was Clairol, blue-black, she explained. He wanted to
have the same color; she had to bring him a bottle. She did as he asked,
imagining he was joking, but a few days later he requested her presence at
the palace to dye his hair for him. She did so, and now they had the exact
same hair color.
The book, Sukarno: An Autobiography as Told to Cindy Adams, was pub-
lished in 1965. To American readers' surprise, Sukarno came across as re-
markably charming and lovable, which was indeed how Adams described
him to one and all. If anyone argued, she would say that they did not know
him the way she did. Sukarno was well pleased, and had the book distrib-
uted far and wide. It helped gain sympathy for him in Indonesia, where he
was now being threatened with a military coup. And Sukarno was not
surprised—he had known all along that Adams would do a far better job
with his memoirs than any "serious" journalist.
Interpretation. Who was seducing whom? It was Sukarno who was doing
the seducing, and his seduction of Adams followed a classical sequence.
First, he chose the right victim. An experienced journalist would have re-
sisted the lure of a personal relationship with the subject, and a man would
have been less susceptible to his charm. And so he picked a woman, andreckoned to be one of the
ways of attracting. The
Sanskrit texts, for
example, give an important
part to the trick of the
woman copying the dress,
expressions, and speech of
her beloved. This kind of
mimetic drama is urged on
the woman who, "being
unable to unite with her
beloved, imitates him to
distract his thoughts." •
The child too, using the
devices of imitating
attitudes, dress, and so on,
seeks to fascinate, until a
magical intention, the
father or mother and thus
to "distract its thoughts."
Identification means that
one is abandoning and not
abandoning amorous
desires. It is a lure which
the child uses to capture his
parents and which, it must
be admitted, they fall for.
The same is true for the
masses, who imitate their
leader, bear his name and
repeat his gestures. They
bow to him, but at the
same time they are
unconsciously baiting a trap
to hold him. Great
ceremonies and
demonstrations are just as
much occasions when the
multitudes charm the
leader as vice versa.
—SERGE MOSCOVICI, THE AGE
OF THE CROWD, TRANSLATED BY
J. C.WHITEHOUSE
My sixth brother, he who
had both his lips cut off,
Prince of the Faithful, is
called Shakashik. • In his
youth he was very poor.
One day, as he was
begging in the streets of
Baghdad, he passed by a
splendid mansion, at the
gates of which stood an
impressive array of
attendants. Upon inquiry
my brother was informed
Enter Their Spirit • 223
one whose journalistic experience lay elsewhere. At his first meeting with
Adams, he sent mixed signals: he was friendly to her, but hinted at another
kind of interest as well. Then, having insinuated a doubt in her mind (Per-
haps he just wants an affair?), he proceeded to mirror her. He indulged her
every mood, retreating every time she complained. Indulging a person is a
form of entering their spirit, letting them dominate for the time being.
Perhaps Sukarno's passes at Adams showed his uncontrollable libido at
work, or perhaps they were more cunning. He had a reputation as a Don
Juan; failing to make a pass at her would have hurt her feelings. (Women
are often less offended at being found attractive than one imagines, and
Sukarno was clever enough to have given each of his four wives the im-
pression that she was his favorite.) The pass out of the way, he moved fur-
ther into her spirit, taking on her casual air, even slightly feminizing himself
by adopting her hair color. The result was that she decided he was not what
she had expected or feared him to be. He was not in the least threatening,
and after all, she was the one in control. What Adams failed to realize was
that once her defenses were lowered, she was oblivious to how deeply he
had engaged her emotions. She had not charmed him, he had charmed her.
What he wanted all along was what he got: a personal memoir written by a
sympathetic foreigner, who gave the world a rather engaging portrait of a
man of whom many were suspicious.
Of all the seductive tactics, entering someone's spirit is perhaps the
most devilish of all. It gives your victims the feeling that they are seducing
you. The fact that you are indulging them, imitating them, entering their
spirit, suggests that you are under their spell. You are not a dangerous se-
ducer to be wary of, but someone compliant and unthreatening. The atten-
tion you pay to them is intoxicating—since you are mirroring them,
everything they see and hear from you reflects their own ego and tastes.
What a boost to their vanity. All this sets up the seduction, the series of ma-
neuvers that will turn the dynamic around. Once their defenses are down,
they are open to your subtle influence. Soon you will begin to take over the
dance, and without even noticing the shift, they will find themselves enter-
ing your spirit. This is the endgame.
Women are not at their ease except with those who take
chances with them, and enter into their spirit.
—NINON DE L'ENCLOS
Keys to Seduction
One of the great sources of frustration in our lives is other people's
stubbornness. How hard it is to reach them, to make them see things
our way. We often have the impression that when they seem to be listening
to us, and apparently agreeing with us, it is all superficial—the moment we
are gone, they revert to their own ideas. We spend our lives butting upthat the house belonged to
a member of the wealthy
and powerful Barmecide
family. Shakashik
approached the door-
keepers and solicited alms.
• "Go in," they said,
"and our master will give
you all that you desire." •
My brother entered the
lofty vestibule and
proceeded to a spacious,
marble-paved hall, hung
with tapestry and
overlooking a beautiful
garden. He stood
bewildered for a moment,
not knowing where to turn
his steps, and then
advanced to the far end of
the hall. There, among the
cushions, reclined a
handsome old man with a
long beard, whom my
brother recognized at once
as the master of the house.
• "What can I do for you,
my friend?" asked the old
man, as he rose to welcome
my brother. • When
Shakashik replied that he
was a hungry beggar,
the old man expressed the
deepest compassion and
rent his fine robes, crying:
"Is it possible that there
should be a man as hungry
as yourself in a city where
I am living? It is, indeed, a
disgrace that I cannot
endure!" Then he
comforted my brother,
adding: "I insist that you
stay with me and partake
of my dinner." • With this
the master of the house
clapped his hands and
called out to one of the
slaves: "Bring in the basin
and ewer." Then he said to
my brother: "Come
forward, my friend, and
wash your hands." •
Shakashik rose to do so,
but saw neither ewer nor
basin. He was bewildered
to see his host make
gestures as though he were
pouring water on his hands
