390 • The Art of Seduction
sexless neutrality. Be friendly, even warm, but no more. You are pushing
them into arming themselves with the seductive charms that are natural to
their sex—exactly what you want.
In the latter stages of the seduction, let your targets feel that you are be-
coming interested in another person—this is another form of taking a step
back. When Napoleon Bonaparte first met the young widow Josephine de
Beauharnais in 1795, he was excited by her exotic beauty and the looks she
gave him. He began to attend her weekly soirees and, to his delight, she
would ignore the other men and remain at his side, listening to him so at-
tentively. He found himself falling in love with Josephine, and had every
reason to believe she felt the same.
Then, at one soiree, she was friendly and attentive, as usual—except
that she was equally friendly to another man there, a former aristocrat, like
Josephine, the kind of man that Napoleon could never compete with when
it came to manners and wit. Doubts and jealousies began to stir within. As
a military man, he knew the value of going on the offensive, and after a few
weeks of a swift and aggressive campaign he had her all to himself, eventu-
ally marrying her. Of course Josephine, a clever seductress, had set it all up.
She did not say she was interested in another man, but his mere presence
at her house, a look here and there, subtle gestures, made it seem that way.
There is no more powerful way to hint that you are losing your desire. Make
your interest in another too obvious, though, and it could backfire. This is
not the situation in which you want to seem cruel; doubt and anxiety
are the effects you are after. Make your possible interest in another barely
perceptible to the naked eye.
Once someone has fallen for you, any physical absence will create un-
ease. You are literally creating space. The Russian seductress Lou Andreas-
Salomé had an intense presence; when a man was with her, he felt her eyes
boring into him, and often became entranced with her coquettish ways and
spirit. But then, almost invariably, something would come up—she would
have to leave town for a while, or would be too busy to see him. It was
during her absences that men fell hopelessly in love with her, and vowed to
be more aggressive next time they were with her. Your absences at this
latter point of the seduction should seem at least somewhat justified. You
are insinuating not a blatant brush-off but a slight doubt: perhaps you
could have found some reason to stay, perhaps you are losing interest, per-
haps there is someone else. In your absence, their appreciation of you will
grow. They will forget your faults, forgive your sins. The moment you re-
turn, they will chase after you as you desire. It will be as if you had come
back from the dead.
According to the psychologist Theodor Reik, we learn to love only
through rejection. As infants, we are showered with love by our mother—
we know nothing else. But when we get a little older, we begin to sense
that her love is not unconditional. If we do not behave, if we do not please
her, she can withdraw it. The idea that she will withdraw her affection fills
us with anxiety, and, at first, with anger—we will show her, we will throwof seducing the mother into
fulfilling his wish. He
demonstrates by his own
actions how he wants to be
loved. It is a primitive
presentation through
reversal, an example of
how to do the thing which
he wishes done by her. In
this presentation lives the
memory of the attentions,
tendernesses, and
endearments once received
from the mother or
loving persons.
—THEODOR REIK,
OF LOVE AND LUST
Give Them Space to Fall—The Pursuer Is Pursued • 391
a tantrum. But that never works, and we slowly realize that the only way to
keep her from rejecting us again is to imitate her—to be as loving, kind,
and affectionate as she is. This will bond her to us in the deepest way. The
pattern is ingrained in us for the rest of our lives: by experiencing a rejec-
tion or a coldness, we learn to court and pursue, to love.
Re-create this primal pattern in your seduction. First, shower your tar-
gets with affection. They will not be sure where this is coming from, but it
is a delightful feeling, and they will never want to lose it. When it does go
away, in your strategic step back, they will have moments of anxiety and
anger, perhaps throwing a tantrum, and then the same childlike reaction:
the only way to win you back, to have you for sure, will be to reverse the
pattern, to imitate you, to be the affectionate, giving one. It is the terror of
rejection that turns the tables.
This pattern will often repeat itself naturally in an affair or relationship.
One person goes cold, the other pursues, then goes cold in turn, making
the first person the pursuer, and on and on. As a seducer, do not leave this
to chance. Make it happen. You are teaching the other person to become a
seducer, just as the mother in her own way taught the child to return her
love by turning her back. For your own sake learn to relish this reversal of
roles. Do not merely play at being the pursued, but enjoy it, give in to it.
The pleasure of being pursued by your victim can often surpass the thrill of
the hunt.
Symbol: The
Pomegranate. Carefully cultivated and
tended, the pomegranate begins to ripen. Do not
gather it too early or force it off the stem—it will be hard and
bitter. Let the fruit grow heavy and full of juice, then stand back—
it will fall on its own. That is when its pulp is most delicious.
