90 • The Art of Seduction
his mind about them without looking weak, particularly if he did so inde-
pendently rather than while he was in prison. Zhou applied the same phi-
losophy to every situation: play the inferior, unthreatening and humble.
What will this matter if in the end you get what you want: time to recover
from a civil war, a treaty, the good will of the masses.
Time is the greatest weapon you have. Patiently keep in mind a long-
term goal and neither person nor army can resist you. And charm is the
best way of playing for time, of widening your options in any situation.
Through charm you can seduce your enemy into backing off, giving you
the psychological space to plot an effective counterstrategy. The key is to
make other people emotional while you remain detached. They may feel
grateful, happy, moved, arrogant—it doesn't matter, as long as they feel. An
emotional person is a distracted person. Give them what they want, appeal
to their self-interest, make them feel superior to you. When a baby has
grabbed a sharp knife, do not try to grab it back; instead, stay calm, offer
candy, and the baby will drop the knife to pick up the tempting morsel you
offer.
4. In 1761, Empress Elizabeth of Russia died, and her nephew ascended to
the throne as Czar Peter III. Peter had always been a little boy at heart—he
played with toy soldiers long past the appropriate age—and now, as czar, he
could finally do whatever he pleased and the world be damned. Peter con-
cluded a treaty with Frederick the Great that was highly favorable to the
foreign ruler (Peter adored Frederick, and particularly the disciplined way
his Prussian soldiers marched). This was a practical debacle, but in matters
of emotion and etiquette, Peter was even more offensive: he refused to
properly mourn his aunt the empress, resuming his war games and parties a
few days after the funeral. What a contrast he was to his wife, Catherine.
She was respectful during the funeral, was still wearing black months later,
and could be seen at all hours beside Elizabeth's tomb, praying and cry-
ing. She was not even Russian, but a German princess who had come east
to marry Peter in 1745 without speaking a word of the language. Even the
lowest peasant knew that Catherine had converted to the Russian Ortho-
dox Church, and had learned to speak Russian with incredible speed, and
beautifully. At heart, they thought, she was more Russian than all of those
fops in the court.
During these difficult months, while Peter offended almost everyone in
the country, Catherine discreetly kept a lover, Gregory Orlov, a lieutenant
in the guards. It was through Orlov that word spread of her piety, her pa-
triotism, her worthiness for rule; how much better to follow such a woman
than to serve Peter. Late into the night, Catherine and Orlov would talk,
and he would tell her the army was behind her and would urge her to stage
a coup. She would listen attentively, but would always reply that this was
not the time for such things. Orlov wondered to himself: perhaps she was
too gentle and passive for such a great step.
The Charmer • 91
Peter's regime was repressive, and the arrests and executions piled up.
He also grew more abusive toward his wife, threatening to divorce her and
marry his mistress. One drunken evening, driven to distraction by Cather-
ine's silence and his inability to provoke her, he ordered her arrest. The
news spread fast, and Orlov hurried to warn Catherine that she would be
imprisoned or executed unless she acted fast. This time Catherine did not
argue; she put on her simplest mourning gown, left her hair half undone,
followed Orlov to a waiting carriage, and rushed to the army barracks.
Here the soldiers fell to the ground, kissing the hem of her dress—they had
heard so much about her but had never seen her in person, and she seemed
to them like a statue of the Madonna come to life. They gave her an army
uniform, marveling at how beautiful she looked in men's clothes, and set
off under Orlov's command for the Winter Palace. The procession grew as
it passed through the streets of St. Petersburg. Everyone applauded Cather-
ine, everyone felt that Peter should be dethroned. Soon priests arrived to
give Catherine their blessing, making the people even more excited. And
through it all, she was silent and dignified, as if all were in the hands of fate.
When news reached Peter of this peaceful rebellion, he grew hysterical,
and agreed to abdicate that very night. Catherine became empress without
a single battle or even a single gunshot.
As a child, Catherine was intelligent and spirited. Since her mother had
wanted a daughter who was obedient rather than dazzling, and who would
therefore make a better match, the child was subjected to a constant barrage
of criticism, against which she developed a defense: she learned to seem to
defer to other people totally as a way to neutralize their aggression. If she
was patient and did not force the issue, instead of attacking her they would
fall under her spell.
When Catherine came to Russia—at the age of sixteen, without a
friend or ally in the country—she applied the skills she had learned in
dealing with her difficult mother. In the face of all the court monsters—
the imposing Empress Elizabeth, her own infantile husband, the endless
schemers and betrayers—she curtseyed, deferred, waited, and charmed. She
had long wanted to rule as empress, and knew how hopeless her husband
was. But what good would it do to seize power violently, laying a claim that
some would certainly see as illegitimate, and then have to worry endlessly
that she would be dethroned in turn? No, the moment had to be ripe, and
she had to make the people carry her into power. It was a feminine style of
revolution: by being passive and patient, Catherine suggested that she had
no interest in power. The effect was soothing—charming.
There will always be difficult people for us to face—the chronically in-
secure, the hopelessly stubborn, the hysterical complainers. Your ability to
disarm these people will prove an invaluable skill. You do have to be care-
ful, though: if you are passive they will run all over you; if assertive you will
make their monstrous qualities worse. Seduction and charm are the most
effective counterweapons. Outwardly, be gracious. Adapt to their every
