The Star • 123
You are a blank screen. Float through life noncommittally and people
will want to seize you and consume you. Of all the parts of your body that
draw this fetishistic attention, the strongest is the face; so learn to tune your
face like an instrument, making it radiate a fascinating vagueness for effect.
And since you will have to stand out from other Stars in the sky, you will
need to develop an attention-getting style. Dietrich was the great practi-
tioner of this art; her style was chic enough to dazzle, weird enough to en-
thrall. Remember, your own image and presence are materials you can
control. The sense that you are engaged in this kind of play will make peo-
ple see you as superior and worthy of imitation.
She had such natural poise . . . such an economy of ges-
ture, that she became as absorbing as a Modigliani. . . .
She had the one essential star quality: she could be mag-
nificent doing nothing.
—BERLIN ACTRESS LILI DARVAS ON MARLENE DIETRICH
The Mythic Star
On July 2, 1960, a few weeks before that year's Democratic National
Convention, former President Harry Truman publicly stated that
John F. Kennedy—who had won enough delegates to be chosen his party's
candidate for the presidency—was too young and inexperienced for the
job. Kennedy's response was startling: he called a press conference, to be
televised live, and nationwide, on July 4. The conference's drama was
heightened by the fact that he was away on vacation, so that no one saw or
heard from him until the event itself. Then, at the appointed hour,
Kennedy strode into the conference room like a sheriff entering Dodge
City. He began by stating that he had run in all of the state primaries, at
considerable expense of money and effort, and had beaten his opponents
fairly and squarely. Who was Truman to circumvent the democratic
process? "This is a young country," Kennedy went on, his voice getting
louder, "founded by young men . . . and still young in heart. . . . The
world is changing, the old ways will not do, . . . It is time for a new genera-
tion of leadership to cope with new problems and new opportunities."
Even Kennedy's enemies agreed that his speech that day was stirring. He
turned Truman's challenge around: the issue was not his inexperience but
the older generation's monopoly on power. His style was as eloquent as
his words, for his performance evoked films of the time—Alan Ladd in
Shane confronting the corrupt older ranchers, or James Dean in Rebel With-
out a Cause. Kennedy even resembled Dean, particularly in his air of cool
detachment.
A few months later, now approved as the Democrats' presidential can-
didate, Kennedy squared off against his Republican opponent, Richard
Nixon, in their first nationally televised debate. Nixon was sharp; he knewpomp all through Cyprus,
was now in progress, and
heifers, their crooked horns
gilded for the occasion, had
fallen at the altar as the
axe struck their snowy
necks. Smoke was rising
from the incense, when
Pygmalion, having made
his offering, stood by the
altar and timidly prayed,
saying: "If you gods can
give all things, may I have
as my wife, I pray—"he
did not dare to say: "the
ivory maiden," but
finished: "one like the
ivory maid." However,
golden Venus, present at
her festival in person,
understood what his
prayers meant, and as a
sign that the gods were
kindly disposed, the flames
burned up three times,
shooting a tongue of fire
into the air. When
Pygmalion returned home,
he made straight for the
statue of the girl he loved,
leaned over the couch, and
kissed her. She seemed
warm: he laid his lips on
hers again, and touched her
breast with his hands—at
his touch the ivory lost its
hardness, and grew soft.
—OVID, METAMORPHOSES,
TRANSLATED BY MARY M. INNES
[John F.] Kennedy
brought to television news
and photojournalism the
components most prevalent
in the world of film: star
quality and mythic story.
With his telegenic looks,
skills at self presentation,
heroic fantasies, and
creative intelligence,
Kennedy was brilliantly
prepared to project a major
screen persona. He
appropriated the discourses
of mass culture, especially
of Hollywood, and
transferred them to the
124 • The Art of Seduction
the answers to the questions and debated with aplomb, quoting statistics on
the accomplishments of the Eisenhower administration, in which he had
served as vice-president. But beneath the glare of the cameras, on black and
white television, he was a ghastly figure—his five o'clock shadow covered
up with powder, streaks of sweat on his brow and cheeks, his face drooping
with fatigue, his eyes shifting and blinking, his body rigid. What was he so
worried about? The contrast with Kennedy was startling. If Nixon looked
only at his opponent, Kennedy looked out at the audience, making eye
contact with his viewers, addressing them in their living rooms as no politi-
cian had ever done before. If Nixon talked data and niggling points of de-
bate, Kennedy spoke of freedom, of building a new society, of recapturing
America's pioneer spirit. His manner was sincere and emphatic. His words
were not specific, but he made his listeners imagine a wonderful future.
The day after the debate, Kennedy's poll numbers soared miraculously,
and wherever he went he was greeted by crowds of young girls, screaming
and jumping. His beautiful wife Jackie by his side, he was a kind of demo-
cratic prince. Now his television appearances were events. He was in due
course elected president, and his inaugural address, also broadcast on televi-
sion, was stirring. It was a cold and wintry day. In the background, Eisen-
hower sat huddled in coat and scarf, looking old and beaten. But Kennedy
stood hatless and coatless to address the nation: "I do not believe that any of
us would exchange places with any other people or any other generation.
The energy, the faith, the devotion which we bring to this endeavor will
light our country and all who serve it—and the glow from that fire can
truly light the world."
Over the months to come Kennedy gave innumerable live press confer-
ences before the TV cameras, something no previous president had dared.
Facing the firing squad of lenses and questions, he was unafraid, speaking
coolly and slightly ironically. What was going on behind those eyes, that
smile? People wanted to know more about him. The magazines teased its
readers with information—photographs of Kennedy with his wife and
children, or playing football on the White House lawn, interviews creating
a sense of him as a devoted family man, yet one who mingled as an equal
with glamorous stars. The images all melted together—the space race, the
Peace Corps, Kennedy facing up to the Soviets during the Cuban missile
crisis just as he had faced up to Truman.
After Kennedy was assassinated, Jackie said in an interview that before
he went to bed, he would often play the soundtracks to Broadway musicals,
and his favorite of these was Camelot, with its lines, "Don't let it be forgot /
that once there was a spot / For one brief shining moment / That was
known as Camelot." There would be great presidents again, Jackie said, but
never "another Camelot." The name "Camelot" seemed to stick, making
Kennedy's thousand days in office resonate as myth.
Kennedy's seduction of the American public was conscious and calculated.
It was also more Hollywood than Washington, which was not surprising:news. By this strategy he
made the news like dreams
and like the movies—a
realm in which images
played out scenarios that
accorded with the viewer's
deepest yearnings. . . .
Never appearing in an
actual film, but rather
turning the television
apparatus into his screen,
he became the greatest
movie star of the twentieth
century.
—JOHN HELLMANN, THE
KENNEDY OBSESSION: THE
AMERICAN MYTH OF JFK
But we have seen that,
considered as a total
phenomenon, the history of
the stars repeats, in its own
proportions, the history of
the gods. Before the gods
(before the stars) the
mythical universe (the
screen) was peopled with
specters or phantoms
endowed with the glamour
and magic of the double. •
Several of these presences
have progressively assumed
body and substance, have
taken form, amplified, and
flowered into gods and
goddesses. And even as
certain major gods of the
ancient pantheons meta-
morphose themselves into
hero -gods of salvation, th e
star-goddesses humanize
themselves and become new
mediators between the
fantastic world of dreams
and man's daily life on
earth. ...• The heroes of
the movies . . . are, in an
obviously attenuated way,
mythological heroes in this
sense of becoming divine.
The star is the actor or
actress who absorbs some of
the heroic—i.e., divinized
and mythic—substance of
the hero or heroine of the
movies, and who in turn
enriches this substance by
