450 • Appendix B: Soft Seduction: How to Sell Anything to the Masses
event and not only will you bypass their resistance, you can also create a so-
cial trend that does the selling for you. To make this work, the event you set
up must stand out from all the other events that are covered by the media,
yet it cannot stand out too far or it will seem contrived. In the case of the
Easter parade, Bernays (through Bertha Hunt) chose women who would
seem elegant and proper even with their cigarettes in their hands. Yet in
breaking a social taboo, and doing so as a group, such women would create
an image so dramatic and startling that the media would be unable to pass it
up. An event that is picked up by the news has the imprimatur of reality.
It is important to give this manufactured event positive associations, as
Bernays did in creating a feeling of rebellion, of women banding together.
Associations that are patriotic, say, or subtly sexual, or spiritual—anything
pleasant and seductive—take on a life of their own. Who can resist? People
essentially persuade themselves to join the crowd without even realizing
that a sale has taken place. The feeling of active participation is vital to se-
duction. No one wants to feel left out of a growing movement.
3. In the presidential campaign of 1984, President Ronald Reagan, run-
ning for reelection, told the public, "It's morning again in America." His
presidency, he claimed, had restored American pride. The recent, successful
Olympics in Los Angeles were symbolic of the country's return to strength
and confidence. Who could possibly want to turn the clock back to 1980,
which Reagan's predecessor, Jimmy Carter, had termed a time of malaise?
Reagan's Democratic challenger, Walter Mondale, thought Americans
had had enough of the Reagan soft touch. They were ready for honesty,
and that would be Mondale's appeal. Before a nationwide television audi-
ence, Mondale declared, "Let's tell the truth. Mr. Reagan will raise taxes,
and so will I. He won't tell you. I just did." He repeated this straightfor-
ward approach on numerous occasions. By October his poll numbers had
plunged to all-time lows.
The CBS News reporter Lesley Stahl had been covering the campaign,
and as Election Day neared, she had an uneasy feeling. It wasn't so much
that Reagan had focused on emotions and moods rather than hard issues. It
was more that the media was giving him a free ride; he and his election
team, she felt, were playing the press like a fiddle. They always managed to
get him photographed in the perfect setting, looking strong and presiden-
tial. They fed the press snappy headlines along with dramatic footage of
Reagan in action. They were putting on a great show.
Stahl decided to assemble a news piece that would show the public how
Reagan used television to cover up the negative effects of his policies. The
piece began with a montage of images that his team had orchestrated over
the years: Reagan relaxing on his ranch in jeans; standing tall at the Nor-
mandy invasion tribute in France; throwing a football with his Secret Ser-
vice bodyguards; sitting in an inner-city classroom. . . . Over these images
Stahl asked, "How does Ronald Reagan use television? Brilliantly. He's
Appendix B: Soft Seduction: How to Sell Anything to the Masses • 451
been criticized as the rich man's president, but the TV pictures say it isn't
so. At seventy-three, Mr. Reagan could have an age problem. But the TV
pictures say it isn't so. Americans want to feel proud of their country again,
and of their president. And the TV pictures say you can. The orchestration
of television coverage absorbs the White House. Their goal? To emphasize
the president's greatest asset, which, his aides say, is his personality. They
provide pictures of him looking like a leader. Confident, with his Marlboro
man walk."
Over images of Reagan shaking hands with handicapped athletes in
wheelchairs and cutting the ribbon at a new facility for seniors, Stahl con-
tinued, "They also aim to erase the negatives. Mr. Reagan tried to counter
the memory of an unpopular issue with a carefully chosen backdrop that
actually contradicts the president's policy. Look at the handicapped Olym-
pics, or the opening ceremony of an old-age home. No hint that he tried
to cut the budgets for the disabled and for federally subsidized housing for
the elderly." On and on went the piece, showing the gap between the feel-
good images that played on the screen and the reality of Reagan's actions.
"President Reagan," Stahl concluded, "is accused of running a campaign in
which he highlights the images and hides from the issues. But there's no
evidence that the charges will hurt him because when people see the presi-
dent on television, he makes them feel good, about America, about them-
selves, and about him."
Stahl depended on the good will of the Reagan people in covering the
White House, but her piece was strongly negative, so she braced herself for
trouble. Yet a senior White House official telephoned her that evening:
"Great piece," he said. "What?" asked a stunned Stahl. "Great piece," he re-
peated. "Did you listen to what I said?" she asked. "Lesley, when you're
showing four and a half minutes of great pictures of Ronald Reagan, no
one listens to what you say. Don't you know that the pictures are overriding
your message because they conflict with your message? The public sees
those pictures and they block your message. They didn't even hear what
you said. So, in our minds, it was a four-and-a-half-minute free ad for the
Ronald Reagan campaign for reelection."
Interpretation. Most of the men who worked on communications for
Reagan had a background in marketing. They knew the importance of
telling a story crisply, sharply, and with good visuals. Each morning they
went over what the headline of the day should be, and how they could
shape this into a short visual piece, getting the president into a video op-
portunity. They paid detailed attention to the backdrop behind the presi-
dent in the Oval Office, to the way the camera framed him when he was
with other world leaders, and to having him filmed in motion, with his
confident walk. The visuals carried the message better than any words
could do. As one Reagan official said, "What are you going to believe, the
facts or your eyes?"
