318 • The Art of Seduction
Symbol: The Pied Piper. A jolly fellow in his red and yellow cloak,
he lures the children from their homes with the delightful sounds of his
flute. Enchanted, they do not notice how far they are walking, how
they are leaving their families behind. They do not even notice the cave
he eventually leads them into, and which closes upon them forever.
Reversal
The risks of this strategy are simple: isolate someone too quickly and
you will induce a sense of panic that may end up in the target's taking
flight. The isolation you bring must be gradual, and disguised as pleasure—
the pleasure of knowing you, leaving the world behind. In any case, some
people are too fragile to be cut off from their base of support. The great
modern courtesan Pamela Harriman had a solution to this problem: she
isolated her victims from their families, their former or present wives, and
in place of those old connections she quickly set up new comforts for her
lovers. She overwhelmed them with attention, attending to their every
need. In the case of Averill Harriman, the billionaire who eventually mar-
ried her, she literally established a new home for him, one that had no asso-
ciations with the past and was full of the pleasures of the present. It is
unwise to keep the seduced dangling in midair for too long, with nothing
familiar or comforting in sight. Instead, replace the familiar things you have
cut them off from with a new home, a new series of comforts.
Phase Three
The Precipice—
Deepening the Effect Through
Extreme Measures
The goal in this phase is to make everything deeper—the effect you have
on their mind, feelings of love and attachment, tension within your vic-
tims. With your hooks deep into them, you can then push them back
and forth, between hope and despair, until they weaken and snap. Show-
ing how far you are willing to go for your victims, doing some noble or
chivalrous deed (16: Prove yourself) will create a powerful jolt, spark an
intensely positive reaction. Everyone has scars, repressed desires, and un-
finished business from childhood. Bring these desires and wounds to the
surface, make your victims feel they are getting what they never got as a
child and you will penetrate deep into their psyche, stir uncontrollable
emotions (17: Effect a regression). Now you can take your victims past
their limits, getting them to act out their dark sides, adding a sense of
danger to your seduction (18: Stir up the transgressive and taboo).
You need to deepen the spell, and nothing will more confuse and enchant
your victims than giving your seduction a spiritual veneer. It is not lust
that motivates you, but destiny, divine thoughts and everything elevated
(19: Use spiritual lures). The erotic lurks beneath the spiritual. Now
your victims have been properly set up. By deliberately hurting them,
instilling fears and anxieties, you will lead them to the edge of the
precipice from which it will be easy to push and make them fall (20: Mix
pleasure with pain). They feel great tension and are yearning for relief.
