Use Spiritual Lures • 365
eral times he takes Emma's hand, but she politely withdraws it. He talks of
love, the magnetic force that draws two people together. Perhaps it has
roots in some earlier existence, some previous incarnation of their souls.
"Take us, for example. Why should we have met? How did it happen? It
can only be that something in our particular inclinations made us come
closer and closer across the distance that separated us, the way two rivers
flow together." He takes her hand again and this time she lets him hold it.
After the fair, he avoids her for a few weeks, then suddenly shows up,
claiming that he tried to stay away but that fate, destiny, has pulled him
back. He takes Emma riding. When he finally makes his move, in the
woods, she seems frightened and rejects his advances. "You must have some
mistaken idea," he protests. "I have you in my heart like a Madonna on a
pedestal. ... I beseech you: be my friend, my sister, my angel!" Under the
spell of his words, she lets him hold her and lead her deeper into the
woods, where she succumbs.
Rodolphe's strategy is threefold. First he talks of sadness, melancholy,
discontent, talk that makes him seem nobler than other people, as if life's
common material pursuits could not satisfy him. Next he talks of destiny,
the magnetic attraction of two souls. This makes his interest in Emma seem
not so much a momentary impulse as something timeless, linked to the
movement of the stars. Finally he talks of angels, the elevated and the sub-
lime. By placing everything on the spiritual plane, he distracts Emma from
the physical, makes her feel giddy, and packs a seduction that could have
taken months into a matter of a few encounters.
The references Rodolphe uses might seem cliched by today's standards,
but the strategy itself will never grow old. Simply adapt it to the occult fads
of the day. Affect a spiritual air by displaying a discontent with the banali-
ties of life. It is not money or sex or success that moves you; your drives are
never so base. No, something much deeper motivates you. Whatever this is,
keep it vague, letting the target imagine your hidden depths. The stars, as-
trology, fate, are always appealing; create the sense that destiny has brought
you and your target together. That will make your seduction feel more
natural. In a world where too much is controlled and manufactured, the
sense that fate, necessity, or some higher power is guiding your relationship
is doubly seductive. If you want to weave religious motifs into your seduc-
tion, it is always best to choose some distant, exotic religion with a slightly
pagan air. It is easy to move from pagan spirituality to pagan earthiness.
Timing counts: once you have stirred your targets' souls, move quickly to
the physical, making sexuality seem merely an extension of the spiritual vi-
brations you are experiencing. In other words, employ the spiritual strategy
as close to the time for your bold move as possible.
The spiritual is not exclusively the religious or the occult. It is anything
that will add a sublime, timeless quality to your seduction. In the modern
world, culture and art have in some ways taken the place of religion. There
are two ways to use art in your seduction: first, create it yourself, in the tar-
get's honor. Natalie Barney wrote poems, and barraged her targets withwere about to pray, getting
her to kneel directly
opposite. • In this posture,
the girl's beauty was
displayed to Rustico in all
its glory, and his longings
blazed more fiercely than
ever, bringing about the
res u rrectio n of the flesh.
Alibech stared at this in
amazement and said: •
"Rustico, what is that I see
sticking out in front of
you, which I do not
possess?" • "Oh, my
daughter," said Rustico,
"this is the devil I was
telling you about. Do you
see what he's doing? He's
hurting me so much that I
can hardly endure it. " •
"Oh, praise be to God,"
said the girl, "I can see
that I am better off than
you are, for I have no such
devil to contend with." •
"You're right there;" said
Rustico. "But you have
something else instead, that
I haven't." • "Oh?" said
Alibech. "And what's
that?" • "You have Hell,"
said Rustico. "And I
honestly believe that God
has sent you here for the
salvation of my soul,
because if this devil
continues to plague the life
out of me, and if you are
prepared to take sufficient
pity upon me to let me put
him back into Hell, you
will be giving me
marvelous relief, as well as
rendering incalculable
service and pleasure to
God, which is what you
say you came here for in
the first place." • "Oh,
Father," replied the girl in
all innocence, "if I really
do have Hell, let's do as
you suggest just as soon as
you are ready." • "God
bless you, my daughter,"
said Rustico. "Let's go and
put him back, and then
perhaps he'll leave me
alone. " • At which point
366 • The Art of Seduction
them. Half of Picasso's appeal to many women was the hope that he would
immortalize them in his paintings—for Ars longa, vita brevis (Art is long, life
is short), as they used to say in Rome. Even if your love is a passing fancy,
by capturing it in a work of art you give it a seductive illusion of eternity.
The second way to use art is to make it ennoble the affair, giving your se-
duction an elevated edge. Natalie Barney took her targets to the theater, to
the opera, to museums, to places full of history and atmosphere. In such
places your souls can vibrate to the same spiritual wavelength. Of course
you should avoid works of art that are earthy or vulgar, calling attention to
your intentions. The play, movie, or book can be contemporary, even a lit-
tle raw, as long as it contains a noble message and is tied to some just cause.
Even a political movement can be spiritually uplifting. Remember to tailor
your spiritual lures to the target. If the target is earthy and cynical, pagan-
ism or art will be more productive than the occult or religious piety.
The Russian mystic Rasputin was revered for his saintliness and his
healing powers. Women in particular were fascinated with Rasputin and
would visit him in his St. Petersburg apartment for spiritual guidance. He
would talk to them of the simple goodness of the Russian peasantry, God's
forgiveness, and other lofty matters. But after a few minutes of this, he
would inject a comment or two that were of a much different nature—
something about the woman's beauty, her lips that were so inviting, the de-
sires she could inspire in a man. He would talk of different kinds of
love—love of God, love between friends, love between a man and a
woman—but mix them all up as if they were one. Then as he returned to
discussing spiritual matters, he would suddenly take the woman's hand, or
whisper into her ear. All this would have an intoxicating effect—women
would find themselves dragged into a kind of maelstrom, both spiritually
uplifted and sexually excited. Hundreds of women succumbed during
these spiritual visits, for he would also tell them that they could not repent
until they had sinned, and who better to sin with than Rasputin.
Rasputin understood the intimate connection between the sexual and
the spiritual. Spirituality, the love of God, is a sublimated version of sexual
love. The language of the religious mystics of the Middle Ages is full of
erotic images; the contemplation of God and of the sublime can offer a
kind of mental orgasm. There is no more seductive brew than the combi-
nation of the spiritual and the sexual, the high and the low. When you talk
of spiritual matters, then, let your looks and physical presence hint of sexu-
ality at the same time. Make the harmony of the universe and union with
God seem to confuse with physical harmony and the union between two
people. If you can make the endgame of your seduction appear as a spiri-
tual experience, you will heighten the physical pleasure and create a seduc-
tion with a deep and lasting effect.he conveyed the girl to one
of their beds, where he
instructed her in the art of
incarcerating that accursed
fiend. • Never having put
a single devil into Hell
before, the girl found the
first experience a little
painful, and she said to
Rustico: • "This devil
must certainly be a bad lot,
Father, and a true enemy
of God, for as well as
plaguing mankind, he even
hurts Hell when he's
driven back inside it. " •
"Daughter," said Rustico,
"it will not always be like
that." And in order to
ensure that it wouldn't,
before moving from the bed
they put him back half a
dozen times, curbing his
arrogance to such good
effect that he was positively
glad to keep still for the rest
of the day. • During the
next few days, however, the
devil's pride frequently
reared its head again, and
the girl, ever ready to obey
the call to duty and bring
him under control,
happened to develop a taste
for the sport, and began
saying to Rustico: • "I can
certainly see what those
worthy men in Gafsa
meant when they said that
serving God was so
agreeable. I don't honestly
recall ever having done
anything that gave me so
much pleasure and
satisfaction as I get from
putting the devil back in
Hell. To my way of
thinking, anyone who
devotes his energies to
anything but the service of
God is a complete
blockhead." • . . . And so,
young ladies, if you stand
in need of God's grace, see
