88 • The Art of Seduction
3. In December of 1936, Chiang Kai-shek, leader of the Chinese Nation-
alists, was captured by a group of his own soldiers who were angry with his
policies: instead of fighting the Japanese, who had just invaded China, he
was continuing his civil war against the Communist armies of Mao Ze-
dong. The soldiers saw no threat in Mao—Chiang had almost annhilated
the Communists. In fact, they believed he should join forces with Mao
against the common enemy—it was the only patriotic thing to do. The sol-
diers thought by capturing him they could compel Chiang to change his
mind, but he was a stubborn man. Since Chiang was the main impediment
to a unified war against the Japanese, the soldiers contemplated having him
executed, or turned over to the Communists.
As Chiang lay in prison, he could only imagine the worst. Several days
later he received a visit from Zhou Enlai—a former friend and now a lead-
ing Communist. Politely and respectfully, Zhou argued for a united front:
Communists and Nationalists against the Japanese. Chiang could not begin
to hear such talk; he hated the Communists with a passion, and became
hopelessly emotional. To sign an agreement with the Communists in these
circumstances, he yelled, would be humiliating, and would lose me all
honor among my own army. It's out of the question. Kill me if you must.
Zhou listened, smiled, said barely a word. As Chiang's rant ended he
told the Nationalist general that a concern for honor was something he
understood, but that the honorable thing for them to do was actually to
forget their differences and fight the invader. Chiang could lead both
armies. Finally, Zhou said that under no circumstances would he allow his
fellow Communists, or anyone for that matter, to execute such a great man
as Chiang Kai-shek. The Nationalist leader was stunned and moved.
The next day, Chiang was escorted out of prison by Communist
guards, transferred to one of his own army's planes, and sent back to his
own headquarters. Apparently Zhou had executed this policy on his own,
for when word of it reached the other Communist leaders, they were out-
raged: Zhou should have forced Chiang to fight the Japanese, or else should
have ordered his execution—to release him without concessions was the
height of pusillanimity, and Zhou would pay. Zhou said nothing and
waited. A few months later, Chiang signed an agreement to halt the civil
war and join with the Communists against the Japanese. He seemed to have
come to his decision on his own, and his army respected it—they could not
doubt his motives.
Working together, the Nationalists and the Communists expelled the
Japanese from China. But the Communists, whom Chiang had previously
almost destroyed, took advantage of this period of collaboration to regain
strength. Once the Japanese had left, they turned on the Nationalists, who,
in 1949, were forced to evacuate mainland China for the island of For-
mosa, now Taiwan.
Now Mao paid a visit to the Soviet Union. China was in terrible shape
and in desperate need of assistance, but Stalin was wary of the Chinese, and
lectured Mao about the many mistakes he had made. Mao argued back.
The Charmer • 89
Stalin decided to teach the young upstart a lesson; he would give China
nothing. Tempers rose. Mao sent urgently for Zhou Enlai who arrived the
next day and went right to work.
In the long negotiating sessions, Zhou made a show of enjoying his
hosts' vodka. He never argued, and in fact agreed that the Chinese had
made many mistakes, had much to learn from the more experienced Sovi-
ets: "Comrade Stalin," he said, "we are the first large Asian country to join
the socialist camp under your guidance." Zhou had come prepared with all
kinds of neatly drawn diagrams and charts, knowing the Russians loved
such things. Stalin warmed up to him. The negotiations proceeded, and a
few days after Zhou's arrival, the two parties signed a treaty of mutual aid—
a treaty far more useful to the Chinese than to the Soviets.
In 1959, China was again in deep trouble. Mao's Great Leap Forward,
an attempt to spark an overnight industrial revolution in China, had been
a devastating failure. The people were angry: they were starving while
Beijing bureaucrats lived well. Many Beijing officials, Zhou among them,
returned to their native towns to try to bring order. Most of them managed
by bribes—by promising all kinds of favors—but Zhou proceeded differ-
ently: he visited his ancestral graveyard, where generations of his family
were buried, and ordered that the tombstones be removed and the coffins
buried deeper. Now the land could be farmed for food. In Confucian
terms (and Zhou was an obedient Confucian), this was sacrilege, but every-
one knew what it meant: Zhou was willing to suffer personally. Every-
one had to sacrifice, even the leaders. His gesture had immense symbolic
impact.
When Zhou died, in 1976, an unofficial and unorganized outpouring
of public grief caught the government by surprise. They could not under-
stand how a man who had worked behind the scenes, and had shunned the
adoration of the masses, could have won such affection.
The capture of Chiang Kai-shek was a turning point in the civil war. To
execute him might have been disastrous: it had been Chiang who had held
the Nationalist army together, and without him it could have broken up
into factions, allowing the Japanese to overrun the country. To force him to
sign an agreement would have not helped either: he would have lost face
before his army, would never have honored the agreement, and would have
done everything he could to avenge his humiliation. Zhou knew that to
execute or compel a captive will only embolden your enemy, and will have
repercussions you cannot control. Charm, on the other hand, is a manipu-
lative weapon that disguises its own manipulativeness, letting you gain a
victory without stirring the desire for revenge.
Zhou worked on Chiang perfectly, paying him respect, playing the in-
ferior, letting him pass from the fear of execution to the relief of unex-
pected release. The general was allowed to leave with his dignity intact.
Zhou knew all this would soften him up, planting the seed of the idea that
perhaps the Communists were not so bad after all, and that he could change
