Poetic Presence/Absence
In 1943, the Argentine military overthrew the government. A popular
forty-eight-year old colonel, Juan Perón, was named secretary of labor
and social affairs. Perón was a widow who had a fondness for young girls; at
the time of his appointment he was involved with a teenager whom he in-
troduced to one and all as his daughter.
One evening in January of 1944, Perón was seated among the other
military leaders in a Buenos Aires stadium, attending an artists' festival. It
was late and there were some empty seats around him; out of nowhere two
beautiful young actresses asked his permission to sit down. Were they jok-
ing? He would be delighted. He recognized one of the actresses—it was
Eva Duarte, a star of radio soap operas whose photograph was often on the
covers of the tabloids. The other actress was younger and prettier, but
Perón could not take his eyes off Eva, who was talking to another colonel.
She was really not his type at all. She was twenty-four, far too old for his
taste; she was dressed rather garishly; and there was something a little icy in
her manner. But she looked at him occasionally, and her glance excited
him. He looked away for a moment, and the next thing he knew she had
changed seats and was sitting next to him. They started to talk. She hung
on his every word. Yes, everything he said was precisely how she felt—the
poor, the workers, they were the future of Argentina. She had known
poverty herself. There were almost tears in her eyes when she said, at the
end of the conversation, "Thank you for existing."
In the next few days, Eva managed to get rid of Perón's "daughter" and
establish herself in his apartment. Everywhere he turned, there she was,
fixing him meals, caring for him when he was ill, advising him on politics.
Why did he let her stay? Usually he would have a fling with a superficial
young girl, then get rid of her when she seemed to be sticking around too
much. But there was nothing superficial about Eva. As time went by he
found himself getting addicted to the feeling she gave him. She was in-
tensely loyal, mirroring his every idea, puffing him up endlessly. He felt
more masculine in her presence, that was it, and more powerful—she be-
lieved he would make the country's ideal leader, and her belief affected
him. She was like the women in the tango ballads he loved so much—the
suffering women of the streets who became saintly mother figures and
looked after their men. Perón saw her every day, but he never felt he fully
knew her; one day her comments were a little obscene, the next she wasHe who does not know
how to encircle a girl so
that she loses sight of
everything he does not
want her to see, he who
does not know how to
poetize himself into a girl
so that it is from her that
everything proceeds as he
wants it—he is and
remains a bungler. . . .
To poetize oneself into a
girl is an art.
—SØREN KIERKEGAARD,
THE SEDUCER'S DIARY,
TRANSLATED BY HOWARD V.
HONG; AND EDNA H. HONG;
What else? If she's out,
reclining in her litter, \
Make your approach
discreet, \ And—just to fox
the sharp ears of those
around you— \ Cleverly
riddle each phrase \ With
ambiguous subtleties. If
she's taking a leisurely \
Stroll down the colonnade,
then you stroll there too—
\ Vary your pace to hers,
march ahead, drop behind
her, \ Dawdling and brisk
by turns. Be bold, \ Dodge
in round the columns
between you, brush your
person \ Lingeringly past
hers. You must never fail \
279
280 • The Art of Seduction
the perfect lady. He had one worry: she was angling to get married, and he
could never marry her—she was an actress with a dubious past. The other
colonels were already scandalized by his involvement with her. Neverthe-
less, the affair went on.
In 1945, Perón was dismissed from his post and jailed. The colonels
feared his growing popularity and distrusted the power of his mistress, who
seemed to have total influence over him. It was the first time in almost two
years that he was truly alone, and truly separated from Eva. Suddenly he felt
new emotions sweeping over him: he pinned her photographs all over the
wall. Outside, massive strikes were being organized to protest his imprison-
ment, but all he could think about was Eva. She was a saint, a woman of
destiny, a heroine. He wrote to her, "It is only being apart from loved ones
that we can measure our affection. From the day I left you ... I have not
been able to calm my sad heart. . . . My immense solitude is full of your
memory." Now he promised to marry her.
The strikes grew in intensity. After eight days, Perón was released from
prison; he promptly married Eva. A few months later he was elected presi-
dent. As first lady, Eva attended state functions in her somewhat gaudy
dresses and jewelry; she was seen as a former actress with a large wardrobe.
Then, in 1947, she left for a tour of Europe, and Argentines followed her
every move—the ecstatic crowds that greeted her in Spain, her audience
with the pope—and in her absence their opinion of her changed. How
well she represented the Argentine spirit, its noble simplicity, its flair for
drama. When she returned a few weeks later, they overwhelmed her with
attention.
Eva too had changed during her trip to Europe: now her dyed blond
hair was pulled into a severe chignon, and she wore tailored suits. It was a
serious look, befitting a woman who was to become the savior of the poor.
Soon her image could be seen everywhere—her initials on the walls, the
sheets, the towels of the hospitals for the poor; her profile on the jerseys of
a soccer team from the poorest part of Argentina, whose club she spon-
sored; her giant smiling face covering the sides of buildings. Since finding
out anything personal about her had become impossible, all kinds of elabo-
rate fantasies began to spring up about her. And when cancer cut her life
short, in 1952, at the age of thirty-three (the age of Christ when he died),
the country went into mourning. Millions filed past her embalmed body.
She was no longer a radio actress, a wife, a first lady, but Evita, a saint.
Interpretation. Eva Duarte was an illegitimate child who had grown up in
poverty, escaped to Buenos Aires to become an actress, and been forced to
do many tawdry things to survive and get ahead in the theater world. Her
dream was to escape all of the constraints on her future, for she was in-
tensely ambitious. Perón was the perfect victim. He imagined himself a
great leader, but the reality was that he was fast becoming a lecherous old
man who was too weak to raise himself up. Eva injected poetry into hisTo attend the theater when
she does, gaze at her
beauty— \ From the
shoulders up she's time \
Most delectably spent, a
feast for adoring glances, \
For the eloquence of
eyebrows, the speaking
sign. \ Applaud when some
male dancer struts on as
the heroine, \ Cheer for
each lover's role. \ When
she leaves, leave too—but
sit there as long as she
does: \ Waste time at your
mistress's whim. . . . \ Get
her accustomed to you; \
Habit's the key, spare no
pains till that's achieved. \
Let her always see you
around, always hear you
talking, \ Show her your
face night and day. \ When
you're confident you'll be
missed, when your absence
\ Seems sure to cause her
regret, \ Then give her
some respite: a field
improves when fallow, \
Parched soil soaks up the
rain. \ Demophoön's
presence gave Phyllis no
more than mild excitement;
\ It was his sailing caused
arson in her heart. \
Penelope was racked by
crafty Ulysses's absence, \
Protesilaus, abroad, made
Laodameia burn. \ Short
partings do best, though:
time wears out affections, \
The absent love fades, a
new one takes its place. \
With Menelaus away,
Helen's disinclination for
sleeping \ Alone led her
into her guest's \ Warm bed
at night. Were you crazy,
Menelaus?
—OVID, THE ART OF LOVE,
TRANSLATED BY PETER GREEN
Concerning the Birth of
Love • Here is what
happens in the soul: •
1. Admiration. • 2. You
think, "Mow delightful it
