xx • Preface
sophisticated art, the ultimate form of power and persuasion. They learned
to work on the mind first, stimulating fantasies, keeping a man wanting
more, creating patterns of hope and despair—the essence of seduction.
Their power was not physical but psychological, not forceful but indirect
and cunning. These first great seductresses were like military generals plan-
ning the destruction of an enemy, and indeed early accounts of seduction
often compare it to battle, the feminine version of warfare. For Cleopatra,
it was a means of consolidating an empire. In seduction, the woman was no
longer a passive sex object; she had become an active agent, a figure of
power.
With a few exceptions—the Latin poet Ovid, the medieval
troubadours—men did not much concern themselves with such a frivolous
art as seduction. Then, in the seventeenth century came a great change:
men grew interested in seduction as a way to overcome a young woman's
resistance to sex. History's first great male seducers—the Duke de Lauzun,
the different Spaniards who inspired the Don Juan legend—began to adopt
the methods traditionally employed by women. They learned to dazzle
with their appearance (often androgynous in nature), to stimulate the
imagination, to play the coquette. They also added a new, masculine ele-
ment to the game: seductive language, for they had discovered a woman's
weakness for soft words. These two forms of seduction—the feminine use
of appearances and the masculine use of language—would often cross
gender lines: Casanova would dazzle a woman with his clothes; Ninon
de l'Enclos would charm a man with her words.
At the same time that men were developing their version of seduction,
others began to adapt the art for social purposes. As Europe's feudal system
of government faded into the past, courtiers needed to get their way in
court without the use of force. They learned the power to be gained by se-
ducing their superiors and competitors through psychological games, soft
words, a little coquetry. As culture became democratized, actors, dandies,
and artists came to use the tactics of seduction as a way to charm and win
over their audience and social milieu. In the nineteenth century another
great change occurred: politicians like Napoleon consciously saw them-
selves as seducers, on a grand scale. These men depended on the art of se-
ductive oratory, but they also mastered what had once been feminine
strategies: staging vast spectacles, using theatrical devices, creating a charged
physical presence. All this, they learned, was the essence of charisma—and
remains so today. By seducing the masses they could accumulate immense
power without the use of force.
Today we have reached the ultimate point in the evolution of seduc-
tion. Now more than ever, force or brutality of any kind is discouraged. All
areas of social life require the ability to persuade people in a way that does
not offend or impose itself. Forms of seduction can be found everywhere,
blending male and female strategies. Advertisements insinuate, the soft sell
dominates. If we are to change people's opinions—and affecting opinion is
basic to seduction—we must act in subtle, subliminal ways. Today no politi-became less harsh, not that
they had managed to
liberate themselves entirely
from the state of oppression
to which their weakness
condemned them; but, in
the state of perpetual war
that continues to exist
between women and men,
one has seen them, with
the help of the caresses they
have been able to invent,
combat ceaselessly,
sometimes vanquish, and
often more skillfully take
advantage of the forces
directed against them;
sometimes, too, men have
turned against women
these weapons the women
had forged to combat them,
and their slavery has
become all the harsher
for it.
—CHODERLOS DE LACLOS, ON
THE EDUCATION OF WOMEN,
TRANSLATED BY LYDIA DAVIS, IN
THE LIBERTINE READER,
EDITED BY MICHAEL FEHER
Much more genius is
needed to make love than
to command armies.
—NINON DE L'ENCLOS
Menelaus, if you are really
going to kill her, \ Then
my blessing go with you,
but you must do it now, \
Before her looks so twist
the strings of your heart \
That they turn your mind;
for her eyes are like armies,
\And where her glances
fall, there cities burn, \
Until the dust of their
ashes is blown \ By her
sighs. I know her,
Men elans, \ And so do
you. And all those who
know her suffer.
—HECUBA SPEAKING ABOUT
HELEN OF TROY IN EURIPIDES,
THE TROJAN WOMEN,
TRANSLATED BY NEIL CURRY
Preface • xxi
cal campaign can work without seduction. Since the era of John F.
Kennedy, political figures are required to have a degree of charisma, a fasci-
nating presence to keep their audience's attention, which is half the battle.
The film world and media create a galaxy of seductive stars and images. We
are saturated in the seductive. But even if much has changed in degree and
scope, the essence of seduction is constant: never be forceful or direct; in-
stead, use pleasure as bait, playing on people's emotions, stirring desire and
confusion, inducing psychological surrender. In seduction as it is practiced
today, the methods of Cleopatra still hold.
People are constantly trying to influence us, to tell us what to do, and just
as often we tune them out, resisting their attempts at persuasion. There is a
moment in our lives, however, when we all act differently—when we are in
love. We fall under a kind of spell. Our minds are usually preoccupied with
our own concerns; now they become filled with thoughts of the loved one.
We grow emotional, lose the ability to think straight, act in foolish ways
that we would never do otherwise. If this goes on long enough something
inside us gives way: we surrender to the will of the loved one, and to our
desire to possess them.
Seducers are people who understand the tremendous power contained
in such moments of surrender. They analyze what happens when people
are in love, study the psychological components of the process—what spurs
the imagination, what casts a spell. By instinct and through practice they
master the art of making people fall in love. As the first seductresses knew,
it is much more effective to create love than lust. A person in love is emo-
tional, pliable, and easily misled. (The origin of the word "seduction" is the
Latin for "to lead astray") A person in lust is harder to control and, once
satisfied, may easily leave you. Seducers take their time, create enchantment
and the bonds of love, so that when sex ensues it only further enslaves
the victim. Creating love and enchantment becomes the model for all
seductions—sexual, social, political. A person in love will surrender.
It is pointless to try to argue against such power, to imagine that you are
not interested in it, or that it is evil and ugly. The harder you try to resist
the lure of seduction—as an idea, as a form of power—the more you will
find yourself fascinated. The reason is simple: most of us have known the
power of having someone fall in love with us. Our actions, gestures, the
things we say, all have positive effects on this person; we may not com-
pletely understand what we have done right, but this feeling of power is in-
toxicating. It gives us confidence, which makes us more seductive. We may
also experience this in a social or work setting—one day we are in an ele-
vated mood and people seem more responsive, more charmed by us. These
moments of power are fleeting, but they resonate in the memory with
great intensity. We want them back. Nobody likes to feel awkward or timid
or unable to reach people. The siren call of seduction is irresistible because
power is irresistible, and nothing will bring you more power in the modern
world than the ability to seduce. Repressing the desire to seduce is a kind ofNo man hath it in his
power to over-rule the
deceitfulness of a woman.
—MARGUERITE OF NAVARRE
This important side-track,
by which woman succeeded
in evading man's strength
and establishing herself in
power, has not been given
due consideration by
historians. From the
moment when the woman
detached herself from the
crowd, an individual
finished product, offering
delights which could not be
obtained by force, but only
by flattery .... the reign
of love's priestesses was
inaugurated. It was a
development of far-reaching
importance in the history of
civilization. . . . Only by
the circuitous route of the
art of love could woman
again assert authority, and
this she did by asserting
herself at the very point at
which she would normally
be a slave at the man's
mercy. She had discovered
the might of lust, the secret
of the art of love, the
daemonic power of a
passion artificially aroused
and never satiated. The
force tints unchained was
thenceforth to count among
the most tremendous of the
world's forces and at
moments to have power
even over life and death. . . .
• The deliberate spell-
binding of man's senses
was to have a magical effect
upon him, opening up an
infinitely wider range of
sensation and spurring him
on as if impelled by an
inspired dream.
—ALEXANDER VON GLEICHEN-
RUSSWURM, THE WORLD'S
LURE, TRANSLATED BY HANNAH
WALLER
