386 • The Art of Seduction
No single beauty is the best,
Since she is all one flower divine
O mystic metamorphosis!
My senses into one sense flow—
Her voice makes perfume when she speaks,
Her breath is music faint and low!
Clearly the author was haunted by Sabatier's presence, and thought of her
constantly—but now she began to be haunted by him, thinking of him
night and day, and wondering who he was. His subsequent letters only
deepened the spell. It was flattering to hear that he was enchanted by more
than her beauty, yet also flattering to know that he was not immune to her
physical charms.
One day an idea occurred to Madame Sabatier as to who the writer
might be: a young poet who had frequented her salon for several years,
Charles Baudelaire. He seemed shy, in fact had hardly spoken to her, but
she had read some of his poetry, and although the poems in the letters were
more polished, the style was similar. At her apartment Baudelaire would al-
ways sit politely in a corner, but now that she thought of it, he would smile
at her strangely, nervously. It was the look of a young man in love. Now
when he visited she watched him carefully, and the more she watched, the
surer she was that he was the writer, but she never confirmed her intuition,
because she did not want to confront him—he might be shy, but he was a
man, and at some point he would have to come to her. And she felt certain
that he would. Then, suddenly the letters stopped coming—and Madame
Sabatier could not understand why, since the last one had been even more
adoring than all of the others before.
Several years went by, in which she often thought of her anonymous
admirer's letters, but they were never renewed. In 1857, however, Baude-
laire published a book of poetry, The Flowers of Evil, and Madame Sabatier
recognized several of the verses—they were the ones he had written for
her. Now they were out in the open for everyone to see. A little while later
the poet sent her a gift: a specially bound copy of the book, and a letter,
this time signed with his name. Yes, he wrote, he was the anonymous
writer—would she forgive him for being so mysterious in the past?
Furthermore, his feelings for her were as strong as ever: "You didn't think
for a moment that I could have forgotten you? . . . You to me are more
than a cherished image conjured up in dream, you're my superstition . . .
my constant companion, my secret! Farewell, dear Madame. I kiss your
hands with profound devotion."
This letter had a stronger effect on Madame Sabatier than the others
had. Perhaps it was his childlike sincerity, and the fact that he had finally
written to her directly; perhaps it was that he loved her but asked nothing
of her, unlike all the other men she knew who at some point had always
turned out to want something. Whatever it was, she had an uncontrollable
desire to see him. The next day she invited him to her apartment, alone.The rumor spread
everywhere. It was even
told to the queen
[Guinevere], who was
seated at dinner. She
nearly killed herself when
she heard the perfidious
rumor of Lancelot's death.
She thought it was true
and was so greatly
perturbed that she was
scarcely able to speak. . . .
She arose at once from the
table, and was able to give
vent to her grief without
being noticed or overheard.
She was so crazed with the
thought of killing herself
that she repeatedly grabbed
at her throat. Yet first she
confessed in conscience,
repented and asked God's
pardon; she accused herself
of having sinned against
the one she knew had
always been hers, and who
would still be, were he
alive. . . . She counted all
of the unkindnesses and
recalled each individual
unkindness; she noted
every one, and repeated
often: "Oh misery! What
was I thinking, when my
lover came before me and I
did not deign to welcome
him, nor even care to
listen! Was I not a fool to
refuse to speak or even look
at him? A fool? No, so
help me God, I was cruel
and deceitful! ... 7 believe
that it was I alone who
struck him that mortal
blow. When he came
happily before me expecting
me to receive him joyfully
and I shunned him and
would never even look at
him, was this not a mortal
blow? At that moment,
when I refused to speak, I
believe I severed both his
heart and his life. Those
two blows killed him, I
think, and not any hired
killers. • "Ah God! Will I
be forgiven this murder, this
sin? Never! All the rivers
Give Them Space to Fall—The Pursuer Is Pursued • 387
Baudelaire appeared at the appointed hour. He sat nervously in his seat,
gazing at her with his large eyes, saying little, and what he did say was for-
mal and polite. He seemed aloof. After he left a kind of panic seized
Madame Sabatier, and the next day she wrote him a first letter of her own:
"Today I'm more calm, and I can feel more clearly the impression of our
Tuesday evening together. I can tell you, without the danger of your think-
ing I'm exaggerating, that I'm the happiest woman on the face of the earth,
that I've never felt more truly that I love you, and that I've never seen you
look more beautiful, more adorable, my divine friend!"
Madame Sabatier had never before written such a letter; she had always
been the one who was pursued. Now she had lost her usual self-possession.
And it only got worse: Baudelaire did not answer right away. When she saw
him next, he was colder than before. She had the feeling there was some-
one else, that his old mistress, Jeanne Duval, had suddenly reappeared in his
life and was pulling him away from her. One night she turned aggressive,
embracing him, trying to kiss him, but he did not respond, and quickly
found an excuse to leave. Why was he suddenly inaccessible? She began to
flood him with letters, begging him to come to her. Unable to sleep, she
would wait all night for him to show up. She had never experienced such
desperation. Somehow she had to seduce him, possess him, have him all
to herself. She tried everything—letters, coquetry, all kinds of promises—
until he finally wrote that he was no longer in love with her and that was
that.
Interpretation. Baudelaire was an intellectual seducer. He wanted to over-
whelm Madame Sabatier with words, dominate her thoughts, make her fall
in love with him. Physically, he knew, he could not compete with her
many other admirers—he was shy, awkward, not particularly handsome. So
he resorted to his one strength, poetry. Haunting her with anonymous let-
ters gave him a perverse thrill. He had to know she would realize, eventu-
ally, that he was her correspondent—no one else wrote like him—but he
wanted her to figure this out on her own. He stopped writing to her be-
cause he had become interested in someone else, but he knew she would be
thinking of him, wondering, perhaps waiting for him. And when he pub-
lished his book, he decided to write to her again, this time directly, stirring
up the old venom he had injected in her. When they were alone, he could
see she was waiting for him to do something, to take hold of her, but he
was not that kind of seducer. Besides, it gave him pleasure to hold himself
back, to sense his power over a woman whom so many desired. By the time
she turned physical and aggressive, the seduction was over for him. He had
made her fall in love; that was enough.
The devastating effect of Baudelaire's push-and-pull on Madame
Sabatier teaches us a great lesson in seduction. First, it is always best to keep
at some distance from your targets. You do not have to go as far as remain-
ing anonymous, but you do not want to be seen too often, or to be seen asand the seas will dry up
first! Oh, misery! How it
would have brought me
comfort and healing if I
had held him in my arms
once before he died. How?
Yes, quite naked next to
him, in order to enjoy him
fully. ..."•.. . When
they came within six or
seven leagues of the castle
where King Bademagu was
staying, news that was
pleasing came to him about
Lancelot—news that he
was glad to hear; Lancelot
was alive and was
returning, hale and hearty.
He behaved most properly
in going to inform the
queen. "Good sir," she
told him, "I believe it,
since you have told me.
But were he dead, I assure
you that I could never
again be happy."
•... Now Lancelot had
his every wish: the queen
willingly sought his
company and affection as
he held her in his arms and
she held him in hers. Her
love-play seemed so gentle
and good to him, both her
kisses and caresses, that in
truth the two of them felt a
joy and wonder of which
has never been heard or
known. But I shall let it
remain a secret for ever,
since it should not be
written of: the most
delightful and choicest
pleasure is that which is
hinted at, but never told.
—CHRÉTIEN DE TROYES,
ARTHURIAN ROMANCES,
TRANSLATED BY WILLIAM W.
KIBLER
He was sometimes so
intellectual that I felt
myself annihilated as a
woman; at other times
he was so wild and
passionate, so desiring,
that I almost trembled
