180 • The Art of Seduction
Time passed, and the Grande Mademoiselle was to leave Paris for a
week or two. Now Lauzun approached her without warning and made an
emotional plea to be considered her confidante, the great friend who
would execute any commission she needed done while she was away. He
was poetic and chivalrous, but what did he really mean? In her diary, Anne
Marie finally confronted the emotions that had been stirring in her since
their first conversation: "I told myself, these are not vague musings; there
must be an object to all of these feelings, and I could not imagine who it
was. . . . Finally, after troubling myself with this for several days, I realized
that it was M. de Lauzun whom I loved, it was he who had somehow
slipped into my heart and captured it."
Made aware of the source of her feelings, the Grande Mademoiselle
became more direct. If Lauzun was to be her confidante, she could talk to
him of marriage, of the matches that were still being offered to her. The
topic might give him a chance to express his feelings; perhaps he might
show jealousy. Unfortunately Lauzun did not seem to take the hint. In-
stead, he asked her why she was thinking of marriage at all—she seemed
so happy. Besides, who could possibly be worthy of her? This went
on for weeks. She could pry nothing personal out of him. In a way, she
understood—there were the differences in rank (she was far above him) and
age (she was six years older). Then, a few months later, the wife of the
king's brother died, and King Louis suggested to the Grande Mademoiselle
that she replace his late sister-in-law—that is, that she marry his brother.
Anne Marie was disgusted; clearly the brother was trying to get his hands
on her fortune. She asked Lauzun his opinion. As the king's loyal servants,
he replied, they must obey the royal wish. His answer did not please her,
and to make things worse, he stopped visiting her, as if it were no longer
proper for them to be friends. This was the last straw. The Grande Made-
moiselle told the king she would not marry his brother, and that was that.
Now Anne Marie met with Lauzun, and told him she would write on a
piece of paper the name of the man she had wanted to marry all along. He
was to put the paper under his pillow and read it the next morning. When
he did, he found the words "C'est vous"—It is you. Seeing the Grande
Mademoiselle the following evening, Lauzun said she must have been jok-
ing; she would make him the laughing stock of the court. She insisted that
she was serious. He seemed shocked, surprised—but not as surprised as the
rest of the court was a few weeks later, when an engagement was an-
nounced between this relatively low-ranking Don Juan and the second-
highest-ranking lady in France, a woman known for both her virtue and
her skill at defending it.
Interpretation. The Duke de Lauzun was one of the greatest seducers in
history, and his slow and steady seduction of the Grande Mademoiselle was
his masterpiece. His method was simple: indirection. Sensing her interest in
him in that first conversation, he decided to beguile her with friendship.first become acquainted
with her and her whole
mental state.
—SØREN KIERKEGAARD, THE
SEDUCER'S DIARY, TRANSLATED
BY HOWARD V. HONG AND
EDNA H. HONG
No sooner had he spoken
than the bullocks, driven
from their mountain
pastures, were on their way
to the beach, as Jove had
directed; they were making
for the sands where the
daughter [Europa] of the
great king used to play
with the young girls of
Tyre, who were her com-
panions. • . . . Aban-
doning the dignity of his
scepter, the father and ruler
of the gods, whose hand
wields the flaming three-
forked bolt, whose nod
shakes the universe,
adopted the guise of a bull;
and, mingling with the
other bullocks, joined in the
lowing and ambled in the
tender grass, a fair sight to
sec. His hide was white as
untrodden snow, snow not
yet melted by the rainy
South wind. The muscles
stood out on his neck, and
deep folds of skin hung
along his flanks. His horns
were small, it is true, but
so beautifully made that
you would swear they were
the work of an artist, more
polished and shining than
any jewel. There was no
menace in the set of his
head or in his eyes; he
looked completely placid. •
Agenor's daughter
[Europa] was filled with
admiration for one so
handsome and so friendly.
But, gentle though he
seemed, she was afraid at
first to touch him; then she
went closer, and held out
flowers to his shining lips.
The lover was delighted
Create a False Sense of Security—Approach Indirectly • 181
He would become her most devoted friend. At first this was charming; a
man was taking the time to talk to her, of poetry, history, the deeds of
war—her favorite subjects. She slowly began to confide in him. Then, al-
most without her realizing it, her feelings shifted: the consummate ladies'
man was only interested in friendship? He was not attracted to her as a
woman? Such thoughts made her aware that she had fallen in love with
him. This, in part, was what eventually made her turn down the match
with the king's brother—a decision cleverly and indirectly provoked by
Lauzun himself, when he stopped visiting her. And how could he be after
money or position, or sex, when he had never made any kind of move?
No, the brilliance of Lauzun's seduction was that the Grande Mademoiselle
believed it was she who was making all the moves.
Once you have chosen the right victim, you must get his or her at-
tention and stir desire. To move from friendship to love can win success
without calling attention to itself as a maneuver. First, your friendly con-
versations with your targets will bring you valuable information about their
characters, their tastes, their weaknesses, the childhood yearnings that gov-
ern their adult behavior. (Lauzun, for example, could adapt cleverly to
Anne Marie's tastes once he had studied her close up.) Second, by spending
time with your targets you can make them comfortable with you. Believing
you are interested only in their thoughts, in their company, they will lower
their resistance, dissipating the usual tension between the sexes. Now they
are vulnerable, for your friendship with them has opened the golden gate to
their body: their mind. At this point any offhand comment, any slight
physical contact, will spark a different thought, which will catch them off-
guard: perhaps there could be something else between you. Once that feel-
ing has stirred, they will wonder why you haven't made a move, and will
take the initiative themselves, enjoying the illusion that they are in control.
There is nothing more effective in seduction than making the seduced
think that they are the ones doing the seducing.
I do not approach her, I merely skirt the periphery of her
existence. . . . This is the first web into which she must be
spun.
—SØREN KIERKEGAARD
Key to Seduction
What you are after as a seducer is the ability to move people in the di-
rection you want them to go. But the game is perilous; the mo-
ment they suspect they are acting under your influence, they will become
resentful. We are creatures who cannot stand feeling that we are obeying
someone else's will. Should your targets catch on, sooner or later they will
turn against you. But what if you can make them do what you want them
to without their realizing it? What if they think they are in control? That isand, until he could achieve
h is hoped-for pleasure,
kissed her hands. He could
scarcely wait for the rest,
only with great difficulty
did he restrain himself. •
Now he frolicked and
played on the green turf
now lay down, all snowy
white on the yellow sand.
Gradually the princess lost
her fear, and with her
innocent hands she stroked
his breast when he offered
it for her caress, and hung
fresh garlands on his horns:
till finally she even
ventured to mount the bull,
little knowing on whose
back she was resting. Then
the god drew away from
the shore by easy stages,
first planting the hooves
that were part of his
disguise in the surf at the
water's edge, and then
proceeding farther out to
sea, till he bore his booty
away over the wide
stretches of mid ocean.
—OVID, METAMORPHOSES,
TRANSLATED BY MARY M. INNES
These few reflections lead
us to the understanding
that, since in attempting a
seduction it is up to the
man to make the first steps,
for the seducer, to seduce is
nothing more than reducing
the distance, in this case
that of the difference
between the sexes and that,
in order to accomplish this,
it is necessary to feminize
himself or at least identify
himself with the object of
his seduction. . . . As
Alain Roger writes: "If
there is a seduction, it is
the seducer who is first lead
astray, in the sense that he
abdicates his own sex. . . .
Seduction undoubtedly
aims at sexual
consummation, but it only
gets there in creating a kind
