
Creating Triangles
One evening in 1882, the thirty-two-year-old Prussian philosopher
Paul Rée, living in Rome at the time, visited the house of an older
woman who ran a salon for writers and artists. Rée noticed a newcomer
there, a twenty-one-year-old Russian girl named Lou von Salomé, who
had come to Rome on holiday with her mother. Rée introduced himself
and they began a conversation that lasted well into the night. Her ideas
about God and morality were like his own; she talked with such intensity,
yet at the same time her eyes seemed to flirt with him. Over the next few
days Rée and Salomé took long walks through the city. Intrigued by her
mind yet confused by the emotions she aroused, he wanted to spend more
time with her. Then, one day, she startled him with a proposition: she
knew he was a close friend of the philosopher Friedrich Nietzsche, then
also visiting Italy. The three of them, she said, should travel together—no,
actually live together, in a kind of philosophers' menage a trois. A fierce
critic of Christian morals, Rée found this idea delightful. He wrote to his
friend about Salomé, describing how desperate she was to meet him. After
a few such letters, Nietzsche hurried to Rome.
Rée had made this invitation to please Salomé, and to impress her; he
also wanted to see if Nietzsche shared his enthusiasm for the young girl's
ideas. But as soon as Nietzsche arrived, something unpleasant happened:
the great philosopher, who had always been a loner, was obviously smitten
with Salomé. Instead of the three of them sharing intellectual conversa-
tions together, Nietzsche seemed to be conspiring to get the girl alone.
When Rée caught glimpses of Nietzsche and Salomé talking without in-
cluding him, he felt shivers of jealousy. Forget about some philosophers'
menage a trois: Salomé was his, he had discovered her, and he would not
share her, even with his good friend. Somehow he had to get her alone.
Only then could he woo and win her.
Madame Salomé had planned to escort her daughter back to Russia,
but Salomé wanted to stay in Europe. Rée intervened, offering to travel
with the Salomés to Germany and introduce them to his own mother,
who, he promised, would look after the girl and act as a chaperone. (Rée
knew that his mother would be a lax guardian at best.) Madame Salomé
agreed to this proposal, but Nietzsche was harder to shake: he decided to
join them on their northward journey to Rée's home in Prussia. At one
point in the trip, Nietzsche and Salomé took a walk by themselves, andLet me tell you about a
gentleman I once knew
who, although he was of
pleasing appearance and
modest behavior, and also a
very capable warrior, was
not so outstanding as
regards any of these
qualities that there were
not to be found many who
were his equal and even
better. However, as luck
would have it, a certain
lady fell very deeply in love
with him. She saw that he
felt the same way, and as
her love grew day by day,
there not being any way for
them to speak to each
other, she revealed her
sentiments to another lady,
who she hoped would be of
service to her in this affair.
Now this lady neither in
rank nor beauty was a whit
inferior to the first; and it
came about that when she
heard the young man
(whom she had never seen)
spoken of so affectionately,
and came to realize that
the other woman, whom
she knew was extremely
discreet and intelligent,
loved him beyond words,
she straight away began to
imagine that he must be
the most handsome, the
wisest, the most discreet of
men, and, in short, the
197
