
The Calculated Surprise
In 1753, the twenty-eight-old Giovanni Casanova met a young girl
named Caterina with whom he fell in love. Her father knew what kind
of man Casanova was, and to prevent some mishap before he could marry
her off, he sent her away to a convent on the Venetian island of Murano,
where she was to remain for four years.
Casanova, however, was not one to be daunted. He smuggled letters to
Caterina. He began to attend Mass at the convent several times a week,
catching glimpses of her. The nuns began to talk among themselves: who
was this handsome young man who appeared so often? One morning, as
Casanova, leaving Mass, was about to board a gondola, a servant girl from
the convent passed by and dropped a letter at his feet. Thinking it might be
from Caterina, he picked it up. It was indeed intended for him, but it was
not from Caterina; its author was a nun at the convent, who had noticed
him on his many visits and wanted to make his acquaintance. Was he inter-
ested? If so, he should come to the convent's parlor at a particular time,
when the nun would be receiving a visitor from the outside world, a friend
of hers who was a countess. He could stand at a distance, observe her, and
decide whether she was to his liking.
Casanova was most intrigued by the letter: its style was dignified, but
there was something naughty about it as well—particularly from a nun. He
had to find out more. At the appointed day and time, he stood to the side
in the convent parlor and saw an elegantly dressed woman talking with a
nun seated behind a grating. He heard the nun's name mentioned, and was
astonished: it was Mathilde M., a well-known Venetian in her early twen-
ties, whose decision to enter a convent had surprised the whole city. But
what astonished him most was that beneath her nun's habit, he could see
that she was a beautiful young woman, particularly in her eyes, which were
a brilliant blue. Perhaps she needed a favor done, and intended that he
would serve as her cat's-paw.
His curiosity got the better of him. A few days later he returned to the
convent and asked to see her. As he waited for her, his heart was beating a
mile a minute—he did not know what to expect. She finally appeared and
sat down behind the grating. They were alone in the room, and she said
that she could arrange for them to have supper together at a little villa
nearby. Casanova was delighted, but wondered what kind of nun he was
dealing with. "And—have you no lover but me?" he asked. "I have aI count upon taking [the
French people] by surprise.
A bold deed upsets people's
equanimity, and they are
dumbfounded by a great
novelty.
—NAPOLEON BONAPARTE,
QUOTED IN EMIL LUDWIG,
NAPOLEON, TRANSLATED BY
EDEN AND CEDAR PAUL
The first care of any dandy
is to never do what one
expects them to do, to
always go beyond. . . .
The unexpected can be
nothing more than a
gesture, but a gesture that
is totally uncommon.
Alcibiades cut off the tail of
his dog in order to surprise
people. When he saw the
looks on his friends as they
gazed upon the mutilated
animal, he said: "Ah, that
is precisely what I wanted
to happen: as long as the
Athenians gossip about
this, they will not say
anything worse about me."
• Attracting attention is
not the only goal of a
dandy, he wants to hold it
by unexpected, even
ridiculous means. After
Alcibiades, how many
apprentice dandies cut off
the tails of their dogs! The
243
