
We all have the power of attraction—the ability to draw people in and
hold them in our thrall. Far from all of us, though, are aware of this
inner potential, and we imagine attractiveness instead as a near-mystical
trait that a select few are born with and the rest will never command. Yet all
we need to do to realize our potential is understand what it is in a person's
character that naturally excites people and develop these latent qualities
within us.
Successful seductions rarely begin with an obvious maneuver or strate-
gic device. That is certain to arouse suspicion. Successful seductions begin
with your character, your ability to radiate some quality that attracts people
and stirs their emotions in a way that is beyond their control. Hypnotized
by your seductive character, your victims will not notice your subsequent
manipulations. It will then be child's play to mislead and seduce them.
There are nine seducer types in the world. Each type has a particular
character trait that comes from deep within and creates a seductive pull.
Sirens have an abundance of sexual energy and know how to use it. Rakes
insatiably adore the opposite sex, and their desire is infectious. Ideal Lovers
have an aesthetic sensibility that they apply to romance. Dandies like to play
with their image, creating a striking and androgynous allure. Naturals are
spontaneous and open. Coquettes are self-sufficient, with a fascinating cool
at their core. Charmers want and know how to please—they are social crea-
tures. Charismatics have an unusual confidence in themselves. Stars are ethe-
real and envelop themselves in mystery.
The chapters in this section will take you inside each of the nine types.
At least one of the chapters should strike a chord—you will recognize part
of yourself. That chapter will be the key to developing your own powers of
attraction. Let us say you have coquettish tendencies. The Coquette chap-
ter will show you how to build upon your own self-sufficiency, alternating
heat and coldness to ensnare your victims. It will show you how to take
your natural qualities further, becoming a grand Coquette, the type we
fight over. There is no point in being timid with a seductive quality. We are
charmed by an unabashed Rake and excuse his excesses, but a halfhearted
Rake gets no respect. Once you have cultivated your dominant character
trait, adding some art to what nature has given you, you can then develop a
second or third trait, adding depth and mystery to your persona. Finally the
section's tenth chapter, on the Anti-Seducer, will make you aware of the op-
3
