Choose the Right Victim • 171
are vulnerable to the attractions of other people, and we take precautions
against unwanted lapses. Madame de Tourvel takes none. Once Valmont
has tested her at the ditch, and has seen she is physically vulnerable, he
knows that eventually she will fall.
Life is short, and should not be wasted pursuing and seducing the
wrong people. The choice of target is critical; it is the set up of the seduc-
tion and it will determine everything else that follows. The perfect victim
does not have certain facial features, or the same taste in music, or similar
goals in life. That is how a banal seducer chooses his or her targets. The
perfect victim is the person who stirs you in a way that cannot be explained
in words, whose effect on you has nothing to do with superficialities. He or
she often has a quality that you yourself lack, and may even secretly envy—
the Présidente, for example, has an innocence that Valmont long ago lost or
never had. There should be a little bit of tension—the victim may fear you
a little, even slightly dislike you. Such tension is full of erotic potential and
will make the seduction much livelier. Be more creative in choosing your
prey and you will be rewarded with a more exciting seduction. Of course,
it means nothing if the potential victim is not open to your influence. Test
the person first. Once you feel that he or she is also vulnerable to you then
the hunting can begin.
It is a stroke of good fortune to find one who is worth se-
ducing. . . . Most people rush ahead, become engaged or do
other stupid things, and in a turn of the hand everything is
over, and they know neither what they have won nor what
they have lost.
—SØREN KIERKEGAARD
Keys to Seduction
Throughout life we find ourselves having to persuade people—to se-
duce them. Some will be relatively open to our influence, if only in
subtle ways, while others seem impervious to our charms. Perhaps we find
this a mystery beyond our control, but that is an ineffective way of dealing
with life. Seducers, whether sexual or social, prefer to pick the odds. As
often as possible they go toward people who betray some vulnerability to
them, and avoid the ones who cannot be moved. To leave people who are
inaccessible to you alone is a wise path; you cannot seduce everyone. On the
other hand, you must actively hunt out the prey that responds the right way.
This will make your seductions that much more pleasurable and satisfying.
How do you recognize your victims? By the way they respond to you.
You should not pay so much attention to their conscious responses—a per-
son who is obviously trying to please or charm you is probably playing to
your vanity, and wants something from you. Instead, pay greater attention
to those responses outside conscious control—a blush, an involuntary mir-The daughter of desire
should strive to have the
following lovers in their
turn, as being mutually
restful to her: a boy who
has been loosed too soon
from the authority and
counsel of his father, an
author enjoying office with
a rather simple-minded
prince, a merchant's son
whose pride is in rivaling
other lovers, an ascetic who
is the slave of love in
secret, a king's son whose
follies are boundless and
who has a taste for rascals,
the countrified son of some
village Brahman, a
married woman's lover, a
singer who has just
pocketed a very large sum
of money, the master of a
caravan but recently come
in. . . .These brief
instructions admit of
infinitely varied
interpretation, dear child,
according to the
circumstance; and it
requires intelligence, insight
and reflection to make the
best of each particular case.
—EASTERN LOVE, VOLUME II:
THE HARLOT'S BREVIARY OF
KSHEMENDRA, TRANSLATED BY
E. POWYS MATHERS
The women who can
be easily won over to
congress: . . . a woman
who looks sideways at
you; . . . a woman who
hates her husband, or who
is hated by him; . . . a
woman who has not had
any children; . . . a
woman who is very fond of
society; a woman who
is apparently very
affectionate toward her
husband; the wife of an
actor; a widow; . . . a
woman fond of
enjoyments; . . . a vain
woman; a woman whose
husband is inferior to her
172 • The Art of Seduction
roring of some gesture of yours, an unusual shyness, even perhaps a flash of
anger or resentment. All of these show that you are having an effect on a
person who is open to your influence.
Like Valmont, you can also recognize the right targets by the effect they
are having on you. Perhaps they make you uneasy—perhaps they corre-
spond to a deep-rooted childhood ideal, or represent some kind of personal
taboo that excites you, or suggest the person you imagine you would be if
you were the opposite sex. When a person has such a deep effect on you, it
transforms all of your subsequent maneuvers. Your face and gestures be-
come more animated. You have more energy; when victims resist you (as a
good victim should) you in turn will be more creative, more motivated to
overcome their resistance. The seduction will move forward like a good
play. Your strong desire will infect the target and give them the dangerous
sensation that they have a power over you. Of course, you are the one ulti-
mately in control since you are making your victims emotional at the right
moments, leading them back and forth. Good seducers choose targets that
inspire them but they know how and when to restrain themselves.
Never rush into the waiting arms of the first person who seems to like
you. That is not seduction but insecurity. The need that draws you will
make for a low-level attachment, and interest on both sides will sag. Look
at the types you have not considered before—that is where you will find
challenge and adventure. Experienced hunters do not choose their prey by
how easily it is caught; they want the thrill of the chase, a life-and-death
struggle—the fiercer the better.
Although the victim who is perfect for you depends on you, certain
types lend themselves to a more satisfying seduction. Casanova liked young
women who were unhappy, or had suffered a recent misfortune. Such
women appealed to his desire to play the savior, but it also responded to ne-
cessity: happy people are much harder to seduce. Their contentment makes
them inaccessible. It is always easier to fish in troubled waters. Also, an air
of sadness is itself quite seductive—Genji, the hero of the Japanese novel
The Tale of Genji, could not resist a woman with a melancholic air. In
Kierkegaard's book The Seducer's Diary, the narrator, Johannes, has one
main requirement in his victim: she must have imagination. That is why he
chooses a woman who lives in a fantasy world, a woman who will envelop
his every gesture in poetry, imagining far more than is there. Just as it is
hard to seduce a person who is happy, it is hard to seduce a person who has
no imagination.
For women, the manly man is often the perfect victim. Mark Antony
was of this type—he loved pleasure, was quite emotional, and when it
came to women, found it hard to think straight. He was easy for Cleopatra
to manipulate. Once she gained a hold on his emotions, she kept him per-
manently on a string. A woman should never be put off by a man who
seems overly aggressive. He is often the perfect victim. It is easy, with a few
coquettish tricks, to turn that aggression around and make him your slave.
Such men actually enjoy being made to chase after a woman.in rank or ability; a
woman who is proud of her
skill in the arts; . . . a
woman who is slighted by
her husband without any
cause; . . . a woman whose
husband is devoted to
travelling; the wife of a
jeweler; a jealous woman;
a covetous woman.
—THE HINDI: ART OF LOVE,
EDITED BY EDWARD WINDSOR
Leisure stimulates love,
leisure watches the
lovelorn, \ Leisure's the
cause and sustenance of
this sweet \ Evil.
Eliminate leisure, and
Cupid's bow is broken, \
His torches lie lightless,
scorned. \ As a plane-tree
rejoices in wine, as a poplar
in water, \ As a marsh-reed
in swampy ground, so
Venus loves \ Leisure. . . .
\ Why do you think
Aegisthus \ Became an
adulterer? Easy: he was
idle—and bored. \
Everyone else was away at
Troy on a lengthy \
Campaign: all Greece had
shipped \ Its contingent
across. Suppose he
hankered for warfare?
Argos \ Had no wars to
offer. Suppose he fancied
the courts? \ Argos lacked
litigation. Love was better
than doing nothing. \
That's how Cupid slips
in; that's how he stays.
—OVID, CURES FOR LOVE,
TRANSLATED BY PETER GREEN
The Chinese have a
proverb: "When Yang is in
the ascendant, Yin is
born," which means,
translated into our
language, that when a man
has devoted the better of
his life to the ordinary
business of living, the Yin,
