426 • The Art of Seduction
Once this realization set in, Ninon wasted no time. She told the mar-
quis that she was returning to Paris, and that it was over for good. He
begged and pleaded his case with much emotion—how could she be so
heartless? Although moved, Ninon was firm. Explanations would only
make it worse. She returned to Paris and resumed the life of a courtesan.
Her abrupt departure apparently shook up the marquis, but apparently not
too badly, for a few months later word reached her that he had fallen in love
with another woman.
Interpretation. A woman often spends months pondering the subtle
changes in her lover's behavior. She might complain or grow angry; she
might even blame herself. Under the weight of her complaints, the man
may change for a while, but an ugly dynamic and endless misunderstand-
ings will ensue. What is the point of all of this? Once you are disenchanted
it is really too late. Ninon could have tried to figure out what had disen-
chanted her—the good looks that now bored her, the lack of mental stimu-
lation, the feeling of being taken for granted. But why waste time figuring
it out? The spell was broken, so she moved on. She did not bother to ex-
plain, to worry about de Villarceaux's feelings, to make it all soft and easy
for him. She simply left. The person who seems so considerate of the
other, who tries to mend things or make excuses, is really just timid. Being
kind in such matters can be rather cruel. The marquis was able to blame
everything on his mistress's heartless, fickle nature. His vanity and pride in-
tact, he could easily move on to another affair and put her behind him.
Not only does the long, lingering death of a relationship cause your
partner needless pain, it will have long-term consequences for you as well,
making you more skittish in the future, and weighing you down with guilt.
Never feel guilty, even if you were both the seducer and the one who now
feels disenchanted. It is not your fault. Nothing can last forever. You have
created pleasure for your victims, stirring them out of their rut. If you
make a clean quick break, in the long run they will appreciate it. The more
you apologize, the more you insult their pride, stirring up negative feelings
that will reverberate for years. Spare them the disingenuous explanations
that only complicate matters. The victim should be sacrificed, not tortured.
6. After fifteen years under the rule of Napoleon Bonaparte, the French
were exhausted. Too many wars, too much drama. When Napoleon was
defeated in 1814, and was imprisoned on the island of Elba, the French
were more than ready for peace and quiet. The Bourbons—the royal family
deposed by the revolution of 1789—returned to power. The king was
Louis XVIII; he was fat, boring, and pompous, but at least there would be
peace.
Then, in February of 1815, news reached France of Napoleon's dra-
matic escape from Elba, with seven small ships and a thousand men. He
Beware the Aftereffects • 427
could head for America, start all over, but instead he was just crazy enough
to land at Cannes. What was he thinking? A thousand men against all the
armies of France? He set off toward Grenoble with his ragtag army. One at
least had to admire his courage, his insatiable love of glory and of France.
Then, too, the French peasantry were spellbound at the sight of their
former emperor. This man, after all, had redistributed a great deal of land
to them, which the new king was trying to take back. They swooned at the
sight of his famous eagle standards, revivals of symbols from the revolution.
They left their fields and joined his march. Outside Grenoble, the first of
the troops that the king sent to stop Napoleon caught up with him.
Napoleon dismounted and walked on foot toward them. "Soldiers of the
Fifth Army Corps!" he cried out. "Don't you know me? If there is one
among you who wishes to kill his emperor, let him come forward and do
so. Here I am!" He threw open his gray cloak, inviting them to take aim.
There was a moment of silence, and then, from all sides, cries rang out of
"Vive l'Empereur!" In one stroke, Napoleon's army had doubled in size.
The march continued. More soldiers, remembering the glory he had
given them, changed sides. The city of Lyons fell without a battle. Generals
with larger armies were dispatched to stop him, but the sight of Napoleon
at the head of his troops was an overwhelmingly emotional experience for
them, and they switched allegiance. King Louis fled France, abdicating in
the process. On March 20, Napoleon reentered Paris and returned to the
palace he had left only thirteen months before—all without having had to
fire a single shot.
The peasantry and the soldiers had embraced Napoleon, but Parisians
were less enthusiastic, particularly those who had served in his government.
They feared the storms he would bring. Napoleon ruled the country for
one hundred days, until the allies and his enemies from within defeated
him. This time he was shipped off to the remote island of St. Helena,
where he was to die.
Interpretation. Napoleon always thought of France, and his army, as a tar-
get to be wooed and seduced. As General de Ségur wrote of Napoleon: "In
moments of sublime power, he no longer commands like a man, but se-
duces like a woman." In the case of his escape from Elba, he planned a
bold, surprising gesture that would titillate a bored nation. He began his re-
turn to France among the people who would be most receptive to him: the
peasantry who had revered him. He revived the symbols—the revolution-
ary colors, the eagle standards—that would stir up the old sentiments. He
placed himself at the head of his army, daring his former soldiers to fire on
him. The march on Paris that brought him back to power was pure theater,
calculated for emotional effect every step of the way. What a contrast this
former amour presented to the dolt of a king who now ruled them.
Napoleon's second seduction of France was not a classical seduction,
following the usual steps, but a re-seduction. It was built on old emotions
