Most of us understand that certain actions on our part will have a
pleasing and seductive effect on the person we would like to seduce.
The problem is that we are generally too self-absorbed: We think more
about what we want from others than what they could want from us. We
may occasionally do something that is seductive, but often we follow this
up a with a selfish or aggressive action (we are in a hurry to get what we
want); or, unaware of what we are doing, we show a side of ourselves that
is petty and banal, deflating any illusions or fantasies a person might have
about us. Our attempts at seduction usually do not last long enough to cre-
ate much of an effect.
You will not seduce anyone by simply depending on your engaging
personality, or by occasionally doing something noble or alluring. Seduc-
tion is a process that occurs over time—the longer you take and the slower
you go, the deeper you will penetrate into the mind of your victim. It is an
art that requires patience, focus, and strategic thinking. You need to always
be one step ahead of your victim, throwing dust in their eyes, casting a
spell, keeping them off balance.
The twenty-four chapters in this section will arm you with a series of
tactics that will help you get out of yourself and into the mind of your vic-
tim, so that you can play it like an instrument. The chapters are placed
in a loose order, going from the initial contact with your victim to the suc-
cessful conclusion. This order is based on certain timeless laws of human
psychology. Because people's thoughts tend to revolve around their daily
concerns and insecurities, you cannot proceed with a seduction until
you slowly put their anxieties to sleep and fill their distracted minds with
thoughts of you. The opening chapters will help you accomplish this.
There is a natural tendency in relationships for people to become so famil-
iar with one another that boredom and stagnation set in. Mystery is the
lifeblood of seduction and to maintain it you have to constantly surprise
your victims, stir things up, even shock them. A seduction should never set-
tle into a comfortable routine. The middle and later chapters will instruct
you in the art of alternating hope and despair, pleasure and pain, until your
victims weaken and succumb. In each instance, one tactic is setting up the
next one, allowing you to push it further with something bolder and more
violent. A seducer cannot be timid or merciful.
To help you move the seduction along, the chapters are arranged in
163
164 • The Art of Seduction
four phases, each phase with a particular goal to aim for: getting the victim
to think of you; gaining access to their emotions by creating moments of
pleasure and confusion; going deeper by working on their unconscious,
stirring up repressed desires; and finally, inducing physical surrender. (The
phases are clearly marked and explained with a short introduction.) By fol-
lowing these phases you will work more effectively on your victim's mind
and create the slow and hypnotic pace of a ritual. In fact, the seductive
process may be thought of as a kind of initiation ritual, in which you are
uprooting people from their habits, giving them novel experiences, putting
them through tests, before initiating them into a new life.
It is best to read all of the chapters and gain as much knowledge as pos-
sible. When it comes time to apply these tactics, you will want to pick and
choose which ones are appropriate for your particular victim; sometimes
only a few are sufficient, depending on the level of resistance you meet and
the complexity of your victim's problems. These tactics are equally applica-
ble to social and political seductions, minus the sexual component in Phase
Four.
At all cost, resist the temptation to hurry to the climax of your seduc-
tion, or to improvise. You are not being seductive but selfish. Everything in
daily life is hurried and improvised, and you need to offer something differ-
ent. By taking your time and respecting the seductive process you will not
only break down your victim's resistance, you will make them fall in love.
