Contents • xvii
Phase Four: Moving In for the Kill
21 Give Them Space to Fall—The Pursuer Is Pursued page 383
If your targets become too used to you as the aggressor, they will give less of their own energy,
and the tension will slacken. You need to wake them up, turn the tables. Once they are under
your spell, take a step bach and they will start to come after you. Hint that you are growing
bored. Seem interested in someone else. Soon they will want to possess you physically, and re-
straint will go out the window. Create the illusion that the seducer is being seduced.
22 Use Physical Lures page 393
Targets with active minds are dangerous: If they see through your manipulations, they may
suddenly develop doubts. Put their minds gently to rest, and waken their dormant senses, by
combining a nondefensive attitude with a charged sexual presence. While your cool, noncha-
lant air is lowering their inhibitions, your glances, voice, and bearing—oozing sex and
desire—are getting under their skin and raising their temperature. Never force the physical;
instead infect your targets with heat, lure them into lust. Morality, judgment, and concern for
the future will all melt away.
23 Master the Art of the Bold Move page 405
A moment has arrived: Your victim clearly desires you, but is not ready to admit it openly, let
alone act on it. This is the time to throw aside chivalry, kindness, and coquetry and to over-
whelm with a bold move. Don't give the victim time to consider the consequences. Showing
hesitation or awkwardness means you are thinking of yourself as opposed to being over-
whelmed by the victim's charms. One person must go on the offensive, and it is you.
24 Beware the Aftereffects page 415
Danger follows in the aftermath of a successful seduction. After emotions have reached a pitch,
they often swing in the opposite direction—toward lassitude, distrust, disappointment. If you
are to part, make the sacrifice swift and sudden. If you are to stay in a relationship, beware a
flagging of energy, a creeping familiarity that will spoil the fantasy. A second seduction is re-
quired. Never let the other person take you for granted—use absence, create pain and conflict,
to keep the seduced on tenterhooks.
Appendix A: Seductive Environment/Seductive Time page 431
Appendix B: Soft Seduction: How to Sell Anything to the Masses page 441
Selected Bibliography • 455
Index • 457

