The Seducer's Victims—The Eighteen Types • 151
These types make for excellent and satisfying victims. First, they usually
have a great deal of pent-up passion and energy, which you can release and
focus on yourself. They also have great imaginations and will respond to
anything vaguely mysterious or romantic that you offer them. All you need
do is disguise some of your less than exalted qualities and give them a part
of their dream. This could be the chance to live out their adventures or be
courted by a chivalrous soul. If you give them a part of what they want
they will imagine the rest. At all cost, do not let reality break the illusion
you are creating. One moment of pettiness and they will be gone, more
bitterly disappointed than ever.
The Pampered Royal. These people were the classic spoiled children. All
of their wants and desires were met by an adoring parent—endless enter-
tainments, a parade of toys, whatever kept them happy for a day or two.
Where many children learn to entertain themselves, inventing games and
finding friends, Pampered Royals are taught that others will do the enter-
taining for them. Being spoiled, they get lazy, and as they get older and the
parent is no longer there to pamper them, they tend to feel quite bored and
restless. Their solution is to find pleasure in variety, to move quickly from
person to person, job to job, or place to place before boredom sets in. They
do not settle into relationships well because habit and routine of some kind
are inevitable in such affairs. But their ceaseless search for variety is tiring
for them and comes with a price: work problems, strings of unsatisfying ro-
mances, friends scattered across the globe. Do not mistake their restlessness
and infidelity for reality—what the Pampered Prince or Princess is really
looking for is one person, that parental figure, who will give them the
spoiling they crave.
To seduce this type, be ready to provide a lot of distraction—new
places to visit, novel experiences, color, spectacle. You will have to main-
tain an air of mystery, continually surprising your target with a new side to
your character. Variety is the key. Once Pampered Royals are hooked,
things get easier for they will quickly grow dependent on you and you can
put out less effort. Unless their childhood pampering has made them too
difficult and lazy, these types make excellent victims——they will be as loyal
to you as they once were to mommy or daddy. But you will have to do
much of the work. If you are after a long relationship, disguise it. Offer
long-term security to a Pampered Royal and you will induce a panicked
flight. Recognize these types by the turmoil in their past—job changes,
travel, short-term relationships—and by the air of aristocracy, no matter
their social class, that comes from once being treated like royalty.
The New Prude. Sexual prudery still exists, but it is less common than it
was. Prudery, however, is never just about sex; a prude is someone who is
excessively concerned with appearances, with what society considers ap-
152 • The Art of Seduction
propriate and acceptable behavior. Prudes rigorously stay within the bounda-
ries of correctness because more than anything they fear society's judg-
ment. Seen in this light, prudery is just as prevalent as it always was.
The New Prude is excessively concerned with standards of goodness,
fairness, political sensitivity, tastefulness, etc. What marks the New Prude,
though, as well as the old one, is that deep down they are actually excited
and intrigued by guilty, transgressive pleasures. Frightened by this attrac-
tion, they run in the opposite direction and become the most correct of all.
They tend to wear drab colors; they certainly never take fashion risks. They
can be very judgmental and critical of people who do take risks and are less
correct. They are also addicted to routine, which gives them a way to tamp
down their inner turmoil.
New Prudes are secretly oppressed by their correctness and long to
transgress. Just as sexual prudes make prime targets for a Rake or Siren, the
New Prude will often be most tempted by someone with a dangerous or
naughty side. If you desire a New Prude, do not be taken in by their judg-
ments of you or their criticisms. That is only a sign of how deeply you fas-
cinate them; you are on their mind. You can often draw a New Prude into
a seduction, in fact, by giving them the chance to criticize you or even try
to reform you. Take nothing of what they say to heart, of course, but now
you have the perfect excuse to spend time with them—and New Prudes
can be seduced simply through being in contact with you. These types ac-
tually make excellent and rewarding victims. Once you open them up and
get them to let go of their correctness, they are flooded with feelings and
energies. They may even overwhelm you. Perhaps they are in a relationship
with someone as drab as they themselves seem to be—do not be put off.
They are simply asleep, waiting to be awakened.
The Crushed Star. We all want attention, we all want to shine, but with
most of us these desires are fleeting and easily quieted. The problem with
Crushed Stars is that at one point in their lives they did find themselves the
center of attention—perhaps they were beautiful, charming and efferves-
cent, perhaps they were athletes, or had some other talent—but those days
are gone. They may seem to have accepted this, but the memory of having
once shone is hard to get over. In general, the appearance of wanting atten-
tion, of trying to stand out, is not seen too kindly in polite society or in the
workplace. So to get along, Crushed Stars learn to tamp down their desires;
but failing to get the attention they feel they deserve, they also become re-
sentful. You can recognize Crushed Stars by certain unguarded moments:
they suddenly receive some attention in a social setting, and it makes them
glow; they mention their glory days, and there is a little glint in the eye; a
little wine in the system, and they become effervescent.
Seducing this type is simple: just make them the center of attention.
When you are with them, act as if they were stars and you were basking in
their glow. Get them to talk, particularly about themselves. In social situa-
