The Anti-Seducer • 137
later, to the amazement of his slaves, he asked why the empress was not
joining him for dinner.
Nothing is more infuriating than being paid no attention. In the process of
seduction, you may have to pull back at times, subjecting your target to
moments of doubt. But prolonged inattention will not only break the se-
ductive spell, it can create hatred. Claudius was an extreme of this behavior.
His insensitivity was created by necessity: in acting like an imbecile, he hid
his ambition and protected himself among dangerous competitors. But the
insensitivity became second nature. Claudius grew slovenly, and no longer
noticed what was going on around him. His inattentiveness had a profound
effect on his wife: How, she wondered, can a man, especially a physically
unappealing man like Claudius, not notice me, or care about my affairs
with other men? But nothing she did seemed to matter to him.
Claudius marks the extreme, but the spectrum of inattention is wide. A
lot of people pay too little attention to the details, the signals another per-
son gives. Their senses are dulled by work, by hardship, by self-absorption.
We often see this turning off the seductive charge between two people, no-
tably between couples who have been together for years. Carried further, it
will stir angry, bitter feelings. Often, the one who has been cheated on by a
partner started the dynamic by patterns of inattention.
2. In 1639, a French army besieged and took possession of the Italian city of
Turin. Two French officers, the Chevalier (later Count) de Grammont and
his friend Matta, decided to turn their attention to the city's beautiful
women. The wives of some of Turin's most illustrious men were more than
susceptible—their husbands were busy, and kept mistresses of their own. The
wives' only requirement was that the suitor play by the rules of gallantry.
The chevalier and Matta were quick to find partners, the chevalier
choosing the beautiful Mademoiselle de Saint-Germain, who was soon to
be betrothed, and Matta offering his services to an older and more experi-
enced woman, Madame de Senantes. The chevalier took to wearing green,
Matta blue, these being their ladies' favorite colors. On the second day of
their courtships the couples visited a palace outside the city. The chevalier
was all charm, making Mademoiselle de Saint-Germain laugh uproariously
at his witticisms, but Matta did not fare so well; he had no patience for this
gallantry business, and when he and Madame de Senantes took a stroll, he
squeezed her hand and boldly declared his affections. The lady of course
was aghast, and when they got back to Turin she left without looking at
him. Unaware that he had offended her, Matta imagined that she was over-
come with emotion, and felt rather pleased with himself. But the Chevalier
de Grammont, wondering why the pair had parted, visited Madame de
Senantes and asked her how it went. She told him the truth—Matta had
dispensed with the formalities and was ready to bed her. The chevalierBut if, like the winter cat
upon the hearth, the lover
clings when he is
dismissed, and cannot bear
to go, certain means must
be taken to make him
understand; and these
should be progressively
ruder and ruder, until they
touch him to the quick of
his flesh. • She should
refuse him the bed, and
jeer at him, and make him
angry; she should stir up
her mother's enmity against
him; she should treat him
with an obvious lack of
candor, and spread herself
in long considerations
about his ruin; his
departure should be openly
anticipated, his tastes and
desires should be thwarted,
his poverty outraged; she
should let him see that she
is in sympathy with
another man, she should
blame him with harsh
words on every occasion;
she should tell lies about
him to her parasites, she
should interrupt his
sentences, and send him on
frequent errands away from
the house. She should seek
occasions of quarrel, and
make him the victim of a
thousand domestic
perfidies; she should rack
her brains to vex him; she
should play with the
glances of another in his
presence, and give herself
up to reprehensible
profligacy before his face;
she should leave the house
as often as possible, and let
it be seen that she has no
real need to do so. All
these means are good for
showing a man the door.
—EASTERN LOVE, VOLUME II:
THE HARLOT'S BREVIARY OF
KSHEMENDRA, TRANSLATED BY
E. POWYS MATHERS
138 • The Art of Seduction
laughed and thought to himself how differently he would manage affairs if
he were the one wooing the lovely Madame.
Over the next few days Matta continued to misread the signs. He did
not pay a visit to Madame de Senantes's husband, as custom required. He
did not wear her colors. When the two went riding together, he went chas-
ing after hares, as if they were the more interesting prey, and when he took
snuff he failed to offer her some. Meanwhile he continued to make his
overforward advances. Finally Madame had had enough, and complained to
him directly. Matta apologized; he had not realized his errors. Moved by his
apology, the lady was more than ready to resume the courtship—but a few
days later, after a few trifling stabs at wooing, Matta once again assumed
that she was ready for bed. To his dismay, she refused him as before. "I do
not think that [women] can be mightily offended," Matta told the cheva-
lier, "if one sometimes leaves off trifling, to come to the point." But
Madame de Senantes would have nothing more to do with him, and the
Chevalier de Grammont, seeing an opportunity he could not pass by, took
advantage of her displeasure by secretly courting her properly, and eventu-
ally winning the favors that Matta had tried to force.
There is nothing more anti-seductive than feeling that someone has assumed
that you are theirs, that you cannot possibly resist them. The slightest ap-
pearance of this kind of conceit is deadly to seduction; you must prove
yourself, take your time, win your target's heart. Perhaps you fear that he or
she will be offended by a slower pace, or will lose interest. It is more likely,
however, that your fear reflects your own insecurity, and insecurity is always
anti-seductive. In truth, the longer you take, the more you show the depth
of your interest, and the deeper the spell you create.
In a world of few formalities and ceremony, seduction is one of the few
remnants from the past that retains the ancient patterns. It is a ritual, and its
rites must be observed. Haste reveals not the depth of your feelings but the
degree of your self-absorption. It may be possible sometimes to hurry
someone into love, but you will only be repaid by the lack of pleasure this
kind of love affords. If you are naturally impetuous, do what you can to
disguise it. Strangely enough, the effort you spend on holding yourself
back may be read by your target as deeply seductive.
3. In Paris in the 1730s lived a young man named Meilcour, who was just
of an age to have his first affair. His mother's friend Madame de Lursay, a
widow of around forty, was beautiful and charming, but had a reputation
for being untouchable; as a boy, Meilcour had been infatuated with her, but
never expected his love would be returned. So it was with great surprise
and excitement that he realized that now that he was old enough, Madame
de Lursay's tender looks seemed to indicate a more than motherly interest
in him.Just as ladies do love men
which be valiant and bold
under arms, so likewise do
they love such as be of like
sort in love; and the man
which is cowardly and over
and above respectful toward
them, will never win their
good favor. Not that they
would have them so
overweening, bold, and
presumptuous, as that they
should by main force lay
them on the floor; but
rather they desire in them a
certain hardy modesty, or
perhaps better a certain
modest hardihood. For
while themselves are not
exactly wantons, and will
neither solicit a man nor
yet actually offer their
favors, yet do they know
well how to rouse the
appetites and passions, and
prettily allure to the
skirmish in such wise that
he which doth not take
occasion by the forelock and
join encounter, and that
without the least awe of
rank and greatness, without
a scruple of conscience or a
fear or any sort of
hesitation, he verily is a
fool and a spiritless
poltroon, and one which
doth merit to be forever
abandoned of kind fortune.
• I have heard of two
honorable gentlemen and
comrades, for the which two
very honorable ladies, and
of by no means humble
quality, made tryst one day
at Paris to go walking in a
garden. Being come thither,
each lady did separate
apart one from the other,
each alone with her own
cavalier, each in a several
alley of the garden, that
was so close covered in with
a fair trellis of boughs as
that daylight could really
scarce penetrate there at all,
and the coolness of the
place was very grateful.
