Beware the Aftereffects • 425
proving yourself all over again, paying attention to nice little details, creat-
ing new temptations. In fact you should mix the two aspects, for too much
pain or pleasure will not prove seductive. You are not repeating the first se-
duction, for the target has already surrendered. You are simply supplying
little jolts, little wake-up calls that show two things: you have not stopped
trying, and they cannot take you for granted. The little jolt will stir up the
old poison, stoke the embers, bring you temporarily back to the beginning,
when your involvement had a most pleasant freshness and tension.
Remember: comfort and security are the death of seduction. A shared
journey with a little bit of hardship will do more to create a deep bond
than will expensive gifts and luxuries. The young are right to not care
about comfort in matters of love, and when you return to that sentiment, a
youthful spark will reignite.
5. In 1652, the famous French courtesan Ninon de l'Enclos met and fell in
love with the Marquis de Villarceaux. Ninon was a libertine; philosophy
and pleasure were more important to her than love. But the marquis in-
spired new sensations: he was so bold, so impetuous, that for once in her
life she let herself lose a little control. The marquis was possessive, a trait
she normally abhorred. But in him it seemed natural, almost charming: he
simply could not help himself. And so Ninon accepted his conditions:
there were to be no other men in her life. For her part she told him that she
would accept no money or gifts from him. This was to be about love, noth-
ing else.
She rented a house opposite his in Paris, and they saw each other daily.
One afternoon the marquis suddenly burst in and accused her of having
another lover. His suspicions were unfounded, his accusations absurd, and
she told him so. This did not satisfy him, and he stormed out. The next day
Ninon received news that he had fallen quite ill. She was deeply con-
cerned. As a desperate recourse, a sign of her love and submission, she de-
cided to cut off her beautiful long hair, for which she was famous, and send
it to him. The gesture worked, the marquis recovered, and they resumed
their affair still more passionately. Friends and former lovers complained of
her sudden transformation into the devoted woman, but she did not care—
she was happy.
Now Ninon suggested that they go away together. The marquis, a mar-
ried man, could not take her to his château, but a friend offered his own in
the country as a refuge for the lovers. Weeks became months, and their lit-
tle stay turned into a prolonged honeymoon. Slowly, though, Ninon had
the feeling that something was wrong: the marquis was acting more like
a husband. Although he was as passionate as before, he seemed so con-
fident, as if he had certain rights and privileges that no other man could
expect. The possessiveness that once had charmed her began to seem
oppressive. Nor did he stimulate her mind. She could get other men, and
equally handsome ones, to satisfy her physically without all that jealousy.
426 • The Art of Seduction
Once this realization set in, Ninon wasted no time. She told the mar-
quis that she was returning to Paris, and that it was over for good. He
begged and pleaded his case with much emotion—how could she be so
heartless? Although moved, Ninon was firm. Explanations would only
make it worse. She returned to Paris and resumed the life of a courtesan.
Her abrupt departure apparently shook up the marquis, but apparently not
too badly, for a few months later word reached her that he had fallen in love
with another woman.
Interpretation. A woman often spends months pondering the subtle
changes in her lover's behavior. She might complain or grow angry; she
might even blame herself. Under the weight of her complaints, the man
may change for a while, but an ugly dynamic and endless misunderstand-
ings will ensue. What is the point of all of this? Once you are disenchanted
it is really too late. Ninon could have tried to figure out what had disen-
chanted her—the good looks that now bored her, the lack of mental stimu-
lation, the feeling of being taken for granted. But why waste time figuring
it out? The spell was broken, so she moved on. She did not bother to ex-
plain, to worry about de Villarceaux's feelings, to make it all soft and easy
for him. She simply left. The person who seems so considerate of the
other, who tries to mend things or make excuses, is really just timid. Being
kind in such matters can be rather cruel. The marquis was able to blame
everything on his mistress's heartless, fickle nature. His vanity and pride in-
tact, he could easily move on to another affair and put her behind him.
Not only does the long, lingering death of a relationship cause your
partner needless pain, it will have long-term consequences for you as well,
making you more skittish in the future, and weighing you down with guilt.
Never feel guilty, even if you were both the seducer and the one who now
feels disenchanted. It is not your fault. Nothing can last forever. You have
created pleasure for your victims, stirring them out of their rut. If you
make a clean quick break, in the long run they will appreciate it. The more
you apologize, the more you insult their pride, stirring up negative feelings
that will reverberate for years. Spare them the disingenuous explanations
that only complicate matters. The victim should be sacrificed, not tortured.
6. After fifteen years under the rule of Napoleon Bonaparte, the French
were exhausted. Too many wars, too much drama. When Napoleon was
defeated in 1814, and was imprisoned on the island of Elba, the French
were more than ready for peace and quiet. The Bourbons—the royal family
deposed by the revolution of 1789—returned to power. The king was
Louis XVIII; he was fat, boring, and pompous, but at least there would be
peace.
Then, in February of 1815, news reached France of Napoleon's dra-
matic escape from Elba, with seven small ships and a thousand men. He
