
Festival Time and Place
Centuries ago, life in most cultures was filled with work and routine.
But at certain moments in the year, this life was interrupted by festi-
val. During these festivals—saturnalias of ancient Rome, the maypole festi-
vals of Europe, the great potlatches of the Chinook Indians—work in the
fields or marketplace stopped. The entire tribe or town gathered in a sacred
space set apart for the festival. Temporarily relieved of duty and responsi-
bility, people were granted license to run amok; they would wear masks or
costumes, which gave them other identities, sometimes those of powerful
figures reenacting the great myths of their culture. The festival was a
tremendous release from the burdens of daily life. It altered people's sense
of time, bringing moments in which they stepped outside of themselves.
Time seemed to stand still. Something like this experience can still be
found in the world's great surviving carnivals.
The festival represented a break in a person's daily life, a radically differ-
ent experience from routine. On a more intimate level, that is how you
must envision your seductions. As the process advances, your targets expe-
rience a radical difference from daily life—a freedom from work or respon-
sibility. Plunged into pleasure and play, they can act differently, can become
someone else, as if they were wearing a mask. The time you spend with
them is devoted to them and nothing else. Instead of the usual rotation of
work and rest, you are giving them grand, dramatic moments that stand
out. You bring them to places unlike the places they see in daily life—
heightened, theatrical places. Physical environment strongly affects people's
moods; a place dedicated to pleasure and play insinuates thoughts of plea-
sure and play. When your victims return to their duties and to the real
world, they feel the contrast strongly and they will start to crave that other
place into which you have drawn them. What you are essentially creating is
festival time and place, moments when the real world stops and fantasy
takes over. Our culture no longer supplies such experiences, and people
yearn for them. That is why almost everyone is waiting to be seduced and
why they will fall into your arms if you play this right.
The following are key components to reproducing festival time and place:
Create theatrical effects. Theater creates a sense of a separate, magical
world. The actors' makeup, the fake but alluring sets, the slightly unreal
433
