they crave the atmosphere you have created, the seduction is complete. As
in the floating world, money is to be wasted. Generosity and luxury go
hand in hand with a seductive environment.
2. It began in the early 1960s: people would come to Andy Warhol's New
York studio, soak up the atmosphere, and stay awhile. Then in 1963, the
artist moved into a new Manhattan space and a member of his entourage
covered some of the walls and pillars in tin foil and spray-painted a brick
wall and other things silver. A red quilted couch in the center, some five-
foot-high plastic candy bars, a turntable that glittered with tiny mirrors, and
helium-filled silver pillows that floated in the air completed the set. Now
the L-shaped space became known as The Factory, and a scene began to
develop. More and more people started showing up—why not just leave
the door open, Andy reasoned, and come what may. During the day, while
Andy would work on his paintings and films, people would gather—actors,
hustlers, drug dealers, other artists. And the elevator would keep groaning
all night as the beautiful people began to make the place their home. Here
might be Montgomery Clift, nursing a drink by himself; over there, a
beautiful young socialite chatting with a drag queen and a museum curator.
They kept pouring in, all of them young and glamorously dressed. It was
like one of those children's shows on TV, Andy once said to a friend, where
guests keep dropping in on the endless party and there's always some new
bit of entertainment. And that was indeed what it seemed like—with noth-
ing serious happening, just lots of talk and flirting and flashbulbs popping
and endless posing, as if everyone were in a film. The museum curator
would begin to giggle like a teenager and the socialite would flounce about
like a hooker.
By midnight everyone would be packed together. You could hardly
move. The band would arrive, the light show would begin, and it would all
careen in a new direction, wilder and wilder. Somehow the crowd would
disperse at some point, then in the afternoon it would all start up again
as the entourage trickled back. Hardly anyone went to The Factory just
once.
It is oppressive always to have to act the same way, playing the same boring
role that work or duty imposes on you. People yearn for a place or a mo-
ment when they can wear a mask, act differently, be someone else. That is
why we glorify actors: they have the freedom and playfulness in relation to
their own ego that we would love to have. Any environment that offers a
chance to play a different role, to be an actor, is immensely seductive. It can
be an environment that you create, like The Factory. Or a place where you
take your target. In such environments you simply cannot be defensive; the
playful atmosphere, the sense that anything is allowed (except seriousness),
dispels any kind of reactiveness. Being in such a place becomes a drug. To
re-create the effect, remember Warhol's metaphor of the children's TVAppendix A: Seductive Environment/Seductive Time • 437
438 • Appendix A: Seductive Environment/Seductive Time
show. Keep everything light and playful, full of distractions, noise, color,
and a bit of chaos. No weight, responsibilities, or judgments. A place to
lose yourself in.
3. In 1746, a seventeen-year-old girl named Cristina had come to the city
of Venice, Italy, with her uncle, a priest, in search of a husband. Cristina
was from a small village but had a substantial dowry to offer. The Venetian
men who were willing to marry her, however, did not please her. So after
two weeks of futile searching, she and her uncle prepared to return to their
village. They were seated in their gondola, about to leave the city, when
Cristina saw an elegantly dressed young man walking toward them.
"There's a handsome fellow!" she said to her uncle. "I wish he was in the
boat with us." The gentleman could not have heard this, yet he approached,
handed the gondolier some money, and sat down beside Cristina, much to
her delight. He introduced himself as Jacques Casanova. When the priest
complimented him on his friendly manners, Casanova replied, "Perhaps I
should not have been so friendly, my reverend father, if I had not been at-
tracted by the beauty of your niece."
Cristina told him why they had come to Venice and why they were
leaving. Casanova laughed and chided her—a man cannot decide to marry
a girl after seeing her for a few days. He must know more about her charac-
ter; it would take at least six months. He himself was looking for a wife,
and he explained to her why he had been as disappointed by the girls he
had met as she had been disappointed by the men. Casanova seemed to
have no destination; he simply accompanied them, entertaining Cristina
the whole way with witty conversation. When the gondola arrived at the
edge of Venice, Casanova hired a carriage to the nearby city of Treviso and
invited them to join him. From there they could catch a chaise to their vil-
lage. The uncle accepted, and on the way to their carriage, Casanova of-
fered his arm to Cristina. What would his mistress say if she saw them, she
asked. "I have no mistress," he answered, "and I shall never have one again,
for I shall never find such a pretty girl as you—no, not in Venice." His
words went to her head, filling it with all kinds of strange thoughts, and she
began to talk and act in a manner that was new to her, becoming almost
brazen. What a pity she could not stay in Venice for the six months he
needed to get to know a girl, she told Casanova. Without hesitation he of-
fered to pay her expenses in Venice for that period while he courted her.
On the carriage ride she turned this offer over in her mind, and once in
Treviso she got her uncle alone and begged him to return to the village by
himself, then come back for her in a few days. She was in love with
Casanova; she wanted to know him better; he was a perfect gentleman,
who could be trusted. The uncle agreed to do as she wished.
The following day Casanova never left her side. There was not the
slightest hint of disagreement in his nature. They spent the day wandering
around the city, shopping and talking. He took her to a play in the evening
