376 • The Art of Seduction
insecurities of the subject, who would get emotional and defensive; deep
down, though, something else would stir inside them—the desire to prove
to Fallaci that they did not deserve her implicit criticisms. Unconsciously
they wanted to please her, to make her like them. When she then shifted
tone, indirectly praising them, they felt they were winning her over and
were encouraged to open up. Without realizing it, they would give freer
rein to their emotions.
In social situations we all wear masks, and keep our defenses up. It is
embarrassing, after all, to reveal one's true feelings. As a seducer you must
find a way to lower these resistances. The Charmer's approach of flattery
and attention can be effective here, particularly with the insecure, but it can
take months of work, and can also backfire. To get a quicker result, and to
break down more inaccessible people, it is often better to alternate harsh-
ness and kindness. By being harsh you create inner tensions—your targets
may be upset with you, but they are also asking themselves questions. What
have they done to earn your dislike? When you then are kind, they feel
relieved, but also concerned that at any moment they might somehow dis-
please you again. Make use of this pattern to keep them in suspense—
dreading your harshness and keen to keep you kind. Your kindness and
harshness should be subtle; indirect digs and compliments are best. Play the
psychoanalyst: make cutting comments concerning their unconscious mo-
tives (you are only being truthful), then sit back and listen. Your silence will
goad them into embarrassing admissions. Leaven your judgments with oc-
casional praise and they will strive to please you, like dogs.
Love is a costly flower, but one must have the desire to
pluck it from the edge of a precipice.
—STENDHAL
Keys to Seduction
Almost everyone is more or less polite. We learn early on not to tell
people what we really think of them; we smile at their jokes, act inter-
ested in their stories and problems. It is the only way to live with them.
Eventually this becomes a habit; we are nice, even when it isn't really nec-
essary. We try to please other people, to not step on their toes, to avoid dis-
agreements and conflict.
Niceness in seduction, however, though it may at first draw someone to
you (it is soothing and comforting), soon loses all effect. Being too nice can
literally push the target away from you. Erotic feeling depends on the cre-
ation of tension. Without tension, without anxiety and suspense, there can
be no feeling of release, of true pleasure and joy It is your task to create
that tension in the target, to stimulate feelings of anxiety, to lead them to
and fro, so that the culmination of the seduction has real weight and inten-
sity. So rid yourself of your nasty habit of avoiding conflict, which is in anyexcite but not requite the
desire of the princess; he
delighted in making her
jealous, or pretending to be
jealous himself. He would
often drive her to tears.
Gradually he forced her
into the position of doing
nothing without his leave,
even trifles of no
importance. Sometimes,
when she was ready to go
to the Opera, he insisted
that she stay at home; and
sometimes he made her go
there against her will. He
obliged her to grant favours
to ladies she did not like or
of whom she was jealous.
She was not even free to
dress as she chose; he
would amuse himself by
making her change her
coiffure or her dress at the
last minute; he did this so
often and so publicly that
she became accustomed to
take his orders in the
evening for what she would
do and wear the following
day; then the next day he
would alter everything, and
the princess would cry all
the more. In the end she
took to sending him
messages by trusted
footmen, for from the first
he had taken up residence
in Luxembourg; messages
which continued
throughout her toilette, to
know what ribbons she
would wear, what gown
and other ornaments;
almost invariably he made
her wear something she did
not wish to. When she
occasionally dared to do
anything, however small,
without his leave, he
treated her like a servant,
and she was in tears for
several days. • . . . Before
assembled company he
would give her such
brusque replies that
everyone lowered their eyes,
and the Duchess would
blush, though her passion
Mix Pleasure with Pain • 377
case unnatural. You are most often nice not out of your own inner good-
ness but out of fear of displeasing, out of insecurity. Go beyond that fear
and you suddenly have options—the freedom to create pain, then magically
dissolve it. Your seductive powers will increase tenfold.
People will be less upset by your hurtful actions than you might imag-
ine. In the world today, we often feel starved for experience. We crave
emotion, even if it is negative. The pain you cause your targets, then, is
bracing—it makes them feel more alive. They have something to complain
about, they get to play the victim. As a result, once you have turned the
pain into pleasure they will readily forgive you. Stir up their jealousy, make
them feel insecure, and the validation you later give their ego by preferring
them over their rivals is doubly delightful. Remember: you have more to
fear by boring your targets than by shaking them up. Wounding people
binds them to you more deeply than kindness. Create tension so you can
release it. If you need inspiration, find the part of the target that most irri-
tates you and use it as a springboard for some therapeutic conflict. The
more real your cruelty, the more effective it is.
In 1818, the French writer Stendhal, then living in Milan, met the
Countess Metilda Viscontini. For him, it was love at first sight. She was a
proud, somewhat difficult woman, and she intimidated Stendhal, who was
terribly afraid of displeasing her with a stupid comment or undignified act.
Finally, unable to take it any longer, he one day took her hand and confessed
his love. Horrified, the countess told him to leave and never come back.
Stendhal flooded Viscontini with letters, begging her to forgive him. At
last, she relented: she would see him again, but under one condition—he
could visit only once every two weeks, for no more than an hour, and only
in the presence of company. Stendhal agreed; he had no choice. He now
lived for those short fortnightly visits, which became occasions of intense
anxiety and fear, since he was never quite sure whether she would change
her mind and banish him forever. This went on for over two years, during
which the countess never showed him the slightest sign of favor. Stendhal
never found out why she had insisted on this arrangement—perhaps she
wanted to toy with him or keep him at a distance. All he knew was that his
love for her only grew stronger, became unbearably intense, until finally he
had to leave Milan.
To get over this sad affair, Stendhal wrote his famous book On Love, in
which he described the effect of fear on desire. First, if you fear the loved
one, you can never get too close or familiar with him or her. The beloved
then retains an element of mystery, which only intensifies your love. Sec-
ond, there is something bracing about fear. It makes you vibrate with sensa-
tion, heightens your awareness, is intensely erotic. According to Stendhal,
the closer the loved one brings you to the edge of the precipice, to the feel-
ing that they could abandon you, the dizzier and more lost you will be-
come. Falling in love means literally falling—losing control, a mix of fear
and excitement.
Apply this wisdom in reverse: never let your targets get too comfortablefor him was in no way
curtailed." • For the
princess, Riom was a
sovereign remedy against
boredom.
—STENDHAL, LOVE,
TRANSLATED BY GILBERT AND
SUZANNE SALE
