130 • The Art of Seduction
Dangers
Stars create illusions that are pleasurable to see. The danger is that people
tire of them—the illusion no longer fascinates—and turn to another
Star. Let this happen and you will find it very difficult to regain your place
in the galaxy. You must keep all eyes on you at any cost.
Do not worry about notoriety, or about slurs on your image; we are re-
markably forgiving of our Stars. After the death of President Kennedy, all
kinds of unpleasant truths came to light about him—the endless affairs, the
addiction to risk and danger. None of this diminished his appeal, and in
fact the public still considers him one of America's greatest presidents. Errol
Flynn faced many scandals, including a notorious rape case; they only en-
hanced his rakish image. Once people have recognized a Star, any kind of
publicity, even bad, simply feeds the obsession. Of course you can go too
far: people like a Star to have a transcendent beauty, and too much human
frailty will eventually disillusion them. But bad publicity is less of a danger
than disappearing for too long, or growing too distant. You cannot haunt
people's dreams if they never see you. At the same time, you cannot let the
public get too familiar with you, or let your image become predictable.
People will turn against you in an instant if you begin to bore them, for
boredom is the ultimate social evil.
Perhaps the greatest danger Stars face is the endless attention they elicit.
Obsessive attention can become disconcerting and worse. As any attractive
woman can attest, it is tiring to be gazed at all the time, and the effect can
be destructive, as is shown by the story of Marilyn Monroe. The solution is
to develop the kind of distance from yourself that Dietrich had—take the
attention and idolatry with a grain of salt, and maintain a certain detach-
ment from them. Approach your own image playfully. Most important,
never become obsessed with the obsessive quality of people's interest in you.
Se-
ducers draw
you in by the fo-
cused, individualized atten-
tion they pay to you. Anti-Seducers
are the opposite: insecure, self-absorbed,
and unable to grasp the psychology of an-
other person, they literally repel. Anti-
Seducers have no self-awareness, and never
realize when they are pestering, imposing,
talking too much. They lack the subtlety
to create the promise of pleasure that seduc-
tion requires. Root out anti-seductive
qualities in yourself, and recognize them
in others—there is no pleasure or profit
in dealing with the Anti-Seducer.
