Create a False Sense of Security—Approach Indirectly • 181
He would become her most devoted friend. At first this was charming; a
man was taking the time to talk to her, of poetry, history, the deeds of
war—her favorite subjects. She slowly began to confide in him. Then, al-
most without her realizing it, her feelings shifted: the consummate ladies'
man was only interested in friendship? He was not attracted to her as a
woman? Such thoughts made her aware that she had fallen in love with
him. This, in part, was what eventually made her turn down the match
with the king's brother—a decision cleverly and indirectly provoked by
Lauzun himself, when he stopped visiting her. And how could he be after
money or position, or sex, when he had never made any kind of move?
No, the brilliance of Lauzun's seduction was that the Grande Mademoiselle
believed it was she who was making all the moves.
Once you have chosen the right victim, you must get his or her at-
tention and stir desire. To move from friendship to love can win success
without calling attention to itself as a maneuver. First, your friendly con-
versations with your targets will bring you valuable information about their
characters, their tastes, their weaknesses, the childhood yearnings that gov-
ern their adult behavior. (Lauzun, for example, could adapt cleverly to
Anne Marie's tastes once he had studied her close up.) Second, by spending
time with your targets you can make them comfortable with you. Believing
you are interested only in their thoughts, in their company, they will lower
their resistance, dissipating the usual tension between the sexes. Now they
are vulnerable, for your friendship with them has opened the golden gate to
their body: their mind. At this point any offhand comment, any slight
physical contact, will spark a different thought, which will catch them off-
guard: perhaps there could be something else between you. Once that feel-
ing has stirred, they will wonder why you haven't made a move, and will
take the initiative themselves, enjoying the illusion that they are in control.
There is nothing more effective in seduction than making the seduced
think that they are the ones doing the seducing.
I do not approach her, I merely skirt the periphery of her
existence. . . . This is the first web into which she must be
spun.
—SØREN KIERKEGAARD
Key to Seduction
What you are after as a seducer is the ability to move people in the di-
rection you want them to go. But the game is perilous; the mo-
ment they suspect they are acting under your influence, they will become
resentful. We are creatures who cannot stand feeling that we are obeying
someone else's will. Should your targets catch on, sooner or later they will
turn against you. But what if you can make them do what you want them
to without their realizing it? What if they think they are in control? That isand, until he could achieve
h is hoped-for pleasure,
kissed her hands. He could
scarcely wait for the rest,
only with great difficulty
did he restrain himself. •
Now he frolicked and
played on the green turf
now lay down, all snowy
white on the yellow sand.
Gradually the princess lost
her fear, and with her
innocent hands she stroked
his breast when he offered
it for her caress, and hung
fresh garlands on his horns:
till finally she even
ventured to mount the bull,
little knowing on whose
back she was resting. Then
the god drew away from
the shore by easy stages,
first planting the hooves
that were part of his
disguise in the surf at the
water's edge, and then
proceeding farther out to
sea, till he bore his booty
away over the wide
stretches of mid ocean.
—OVID, METAMORPHOSES,
TRANSLATED BY MARY M. INNES
These few reflections lead
us to the understanding
that, since in attempting a
seduction it is up to the
man to make the first steps,
for the seducer, to seduce is
nothing more than reducing
the distance, in this case
that of the difference
between the sexes and that,
in order to accomplish this,
it is necessary to feminize
himself or at least identify
himself with the object of
his seduction. . . . As
Alain Roger writes: "If
there is a seduction, it is
the seducer who is first lead
astray, in the sense that he
abdicates his own sex. . . .
Seduction undoubtedly
aims at sexual
consummation, but it only
gets there in creating a kind
182 • The Art of Seduction
the power of indirection and no seducer can work his or her magic with-
out it.
The first move to master is simple: once you have chosen the right per-
son, you must make the target come to you. If, in the opening stages, you
can make your targets think that they are the ones making the first ap-
proach, you have won the game. There will be no resentment, no perverse
counterreaction, no paranoia.
To make them come to you requires giving them space. This can be
accomplished in several ways. You can haunt the periphery of their exis-
tence, letting them notice you in different places but never approaching
them. You will get their attention this way, and if they want to bridge the
gap, they will have to come to you. You can befriend them, as Lauzun did
the Grande Mademoiselle, moving steadily closer while always maintaining
the distance appropriate for friends of the opposite sex. You can also play
cat and mouse with them, first seeming interested, then stepping back—
actively luring them to follow you into your web. Whatever you do, and
whatever kind of seduction you are practicing, you must at all cost avoid
the natural tendency to crowd your targets. Do not make the mistake of
thinking they will lose interest unless you apply pressure, or that they will
enjoy a flood of attention. Too much attention early on will actually just
suggest insecurity, and raise doubts as to your motives. Worst of all, it gives
your targets no room for imagination. Take a step back; let the thoughts
you are provoking come to them as if they were their own. This is doubly
important if you are dealing with someone who has a deep effect on you.
We can never really understand the opposite sex. They are always mys-
terious to us, and it is this mystery that provides the tension so delightful in
seduction; but it is also a source of unease. Freud famously wondered what
women really wanted; even to this most insightful of psychological
thinkers, the opposite sex was a foreign land. For both men and women,
there are deep-rooted feelings of fear and anxiety in relation to the oppo-
site sex. In the initial stages of a seduction, then, you must find ways to
calm any sense of mistrust that the other person may experience. (A sense
of danger and fear can heighten the seduction later on, but if you stir such
emotions in the first stages, you will more likely scare the target away.) Es-
tablish a neutral distance, seem harmless, and you give yourself room to
move. Casanova cultivated a slight femininity in his character—an interest
in clothes, theater, domestic matters—that young girls found comforting.
The Renaissance courtesan Tullia d'Aragona, developing friendships with the
great thinkers and poets of her time, talked of literature and philosophy—
anything but the boudoir (and anything but the money that was also her
goal). Johannes, the narrator of Søren Kierkegaard's The Seducer's Diary, fol-
lows his target, Cordelia, from a distance; when their paths cross, he is po-
lite and apparently shy. As Cordelia gets to know him, he doesn't frighten
her. In fact he is so innocuous she begins to wish he were less so.
Duke Ellington, the great jazz artist and a consummate seducer, wouldof simulacra of Gomorra.
The seducer is nothing
more than a lesbian."
—FRÉDÉRIC MONNEYRON,
SÉDUIRE: L'IMAGINAIRE DE LA
SÉDUCTION DE DON GIOVANNI
À MICK JAGGER
As he [Jupiter] was
hurrying busily to and fro,
he stopped short at the
sight of an Arcadian
maiden. The fire of
passion kindled the very
marrow of his bones. This
girl was not one who spent
her time in spinning soft
fibers of wool, or in
arranging her hair in
different styles. She was
one of Diana's warriors,
wearing her tunic pinned
together with a brooch, her
tresses carelessly caught
back by a white ribbon,
and carrying in her hand a
light javelin or her
bow. . . . • The sun on
high had passed its zenith,
when she entered a grove
whose trees had never felt
the axe. Here she took her
quiver from her shoulders,
unstrung her pliant bow,
and lay down on the
turf, resting her head on
her painted quiver. When
Jupiter saw her thus, tired
and unprotected, he
said: "Here is a secret of
which my wife will know
nothing; or if she does get
to know of it, it will be
worth her reproaches!" •
Without wasting time he
assumed the appearance
and the dress of Diana,
and spoke to the girl.
'Dearest of all my
companions," he said,
"where have you been
hunting? On what
mountain ridges?" She
raised herself from the
grass: "Greeting, divine
mistress," she cried,
"greater in my sight than
