Effect a Regression • 345
camier. The face and voice were close. More important, there was the calm
spirit, the innocent, virginal quality. Reading to her the prayer to Sylphide
he had just written, he told her he wanted to be young again, and seeing
her had brought his youth back to him. Reconciled with Madame Ré-
camier, he began to work again on the memoirs, which were eventually
published under the title Memoirs from Beyond the Grave. Most critics agreed
that the book was his masterpiece. The memoirs were dedicated to
Madame Récamier, to whom he remained devoted until his death, in
1848.
Interpretation. All of us carry within us an image of an ideal type of per-
son whom we yearn to meet and love. Most often the type is a composite
made up of bits and pieces of different people from our youth, and even of
characters in books and movies. People who influenced us inordinately—a
teacher for instance—may also figure. The traits have nothing to do with
superficial interests. Rather, they are unconscious, hard to verbalize.
We searched hardest for this ideal type in our adolescence, when we
were more idealistic. Often our first loves have more of these traits than our
subsequent affairs. For Chateaubriand, living with his family in their se-
cluded castle, his first love was his sister Lucile, whom he adored and ideal-
ized. But since love with her was impossible, he created a figure out of his
imagination who had all her positive attributes—nobility of spirit, inno-
cence, courage.
Madame Récamier could not have known about Chateaubriand's ideal
type, but she did know something about him, well before she ever met
him. She had read all of his books, and his characters were highly autobio-
graphical. She knew of his obsession with his lost youth; and everyone
knew of his endless and unsatisfying affairs with women, his hyperrestless
spirit. Madame Récamier knew how to mirror people, entering their spirit,
and one of her first acts was to take Chateaubriand to Vallée aux Loups,
where he felt he had left part of his youth. Alive with memories, he re-
gressed further into his childhood, to the days in the castle. She actively en-
couraged this. Most important, she embodied a spirit that came naturally to
her, but that matched his youthful ideal: innocent, noble, kind. (The fact
that so many men fell in love with her suggests that many men had the
same ideals.) Madame Récamier was Lucile/Sylphide. It took him years to
realize it, but when he did, her spell over him was complete.
It is nearly impossible to embody someone's ideal completely. But if
you come close enough, if you evoke some of that ideal spirit, you can lead
that person into a deep seduction. To effect this regression you must play
the role of the therapist. Get your targets to open up about their past, par-
ticularly their former loves and most particularly their first love. Pay atten-
tion to any expressions of disappointment, how this or that person did not
give them what they wanted. Take them to places that evoke their youth.
In this regression you are creating not so much a relationship of depen-
346 • The Art of Seduction
dency and immaturity but rather the adolescent spirit of a first love. There
is a touch of innocence to the relationship. So much of adult life involves
compromise, conniving, and a certain toughness. Create the ideal atmo-
sphere by keeping such things out, drawing the other person into a kind of
mutual weakness, conjuring a second virginity. There should be a dream-
like quality to the affair, as if the target were reliving that first love but
could not quite believe it. Let all of this unfold slowly, each encounter re-
vealing more ideal qualities. The sense of reliving a past pleasure is simply
impossible to resist.
4. Some time in the summer of 1614, several members of England's upper
nobility, including the Archbishop of Canterbury, met to decide what to
do about the Earl of Somerset, the favorite of King James I, who was
forty-eight at the time. After eight years as the favorite, the young earl had
accumulated such power and wealth, and so many titles, that nothing was
left for anyone else. But how to get rid of this powerful man? For the time
being the conspirators had no answer.
A few weeks later the king was inspecting the royal stables when he
caught sight of a young man who was new to the court: the twenty-two-
year-old George Villiers, a member of the lower nobility. The courtiers
who accompanied the king that day watched the king's eyes following Vil-
liers, and saw with what interest he asked about this young man. Indeed
everyone had to agree that he was a most handsome youth, with the face of
an angel and a charmingly childish manner. When news of the king's inter-
est in Villiers reached the conspirators, they instantly knew they had found
what they had been looking for: a young man who could seduce the king
and supplant the dreaded favorite. Left to nature, though, the seduction
would never happen. They had to help it along. So, without telling Villiers
of their plan, they befriended him.
King James was the son of Mary Queen of Scots. His childhood had
been a nightmare: his father, his mother's favorite, and his own regents had
all been murdered; his mother had first been exiled, later executed. When
James was young, to escape suspicion he played the part of a fool. He hated
the sight of a sword and could not stand the slightest sign of argument.
When his cousin Queen Elizabeth I died in 1603, leaving no heir, he be-
came king of England.
James surrounded himself with bright, happy young men, and seemed
to prefer the company of boys. In 1612, his son, Prince Henry, died. The
king was inconsolable. He needed distraction and good cheer, and his fa-
vorite, the Earl of Somerset, was no longer so young and attractive. The
timing for a seduction was perfect. And so the conspirators went to work
on Villiers, under the guise of trying to help him advance within the court.
They supplied him with a magnificent wardrobe, jewels, a glittering car-
riage, the kind of things the king noticed. They worked on his riding,
