76 • The Art of Seduction
same time, he practiced celibacy, and had a horror of being touched. In
1929 he shocked theosophists around the world by proclaiming that he was
not a god or even a guru, and did not want any followers. This only height-
ened his appeal: women fell in love with him in great numbers, and his ad-
visers grew even more devoted. Physically and psychologically, Krishnamurti
was sending contrary signals. While preaching a generalized love and accep-
tance, in his personal life he pushed people away His attractiveness and his
obsession with his appearance might have gained him attention but by
themselves would not have made women fall in love with him; his lessons of
celibacy and spiritual virtue would have created disciples but not physical
love. The combination of these traits, however, both drew people in and
frustrated them, a coquettish dynamic that created an emotional and physical
attachment to a man who shunned such things. His withdrawal from the
world had the effect of only heightening the devotion of his followers.
Coquetry depends on developing a pattern to keep the other person off
balance. The strategy is extremely effective. Experiencing a pleasure once,
we yearn to repeat it; so the Coquette gives us pleasure, then withdraws it.
The alternation of heat and cold is the most common pattern, and has sev-
eral variations. The eighth-century Chinese Coquette Yang Kuei-Fei to-
tally enslaved the Emperor Ming Huang through a pattern of kindness and
bitterness: having charmed him with kindness, she would suddenly get an-
gry, blaming him harshly for the slightest mistake. Unable to live without
the pleasure she gave him, the emperor would turn the court upside down
to please her when she was angry or upset. Her tears had a similar effect:
what had he done, why was she so sad? He eventually ruined himself and
his kingdom trying to keep her happy. Tears, anger, and the production of
guilt are all the tools of the Coquette. A similar dynamic appears in a lover's
quarrel: when a couple fights, then reconciles, the joys of reconciliation
only make the attachment stronger. Sadness of any sort is also seductive,
particularly if it seems deep-rooted, even spiritual, rather than needy or
pathetic—it makes people come to you.
Coquettes are never jealous—that would undermine their image of
fundamental self-sufficiency. But they are masters at inciting jealousy: by
paying attention to a third party, creating a triangle of desire, they signal to
their victims that they may not be that interested. This triangulation is ex-
tremely seductive, in social contexts as well as erotic ones. Interested in nar-
cissistic women, Freud was a narcissist himself, and his aloofness drove his
disciples crazy. (They even had a name for it—his "god complex.") Behav-
ing like a kind of messiah, too lofty for petty emotions, Freud always main-
tained a distance between himself and his students, hardly ever inviting
them over for dinner, say, and keeping his private life shrouded in mystery.
Yet he would occasionally choose an acolyte to confide in—Carl Jung,
Otto Rank, Lou Andreas-Salomé. The result was that his disciples went
berserk trying to win his favor, to be the one he chose. Their jealousy
when he suddenly favored one of them only increased his power over
them. People's natural insecurities are heightened in group settings; byroom but ourselves. • . . . I
swear by all the gods in
heaven that for anything
that had happened between
us when I got up after
sleeping with Socrates, I
might have been sleeping
with my father or elder
brother. • What do you
suppose to have been my
state of mind after that?
On the one hand I
realized that I had been
slighted, but on the other I
felt a reverence for Socrates'
character, his self-control
and courage . . . The result
was that I could neither
bring myself to be angry
with him and tear myself
away from his society, nor
find a way of subduing
him to my will. . . . I was
utterly disconcerted, and
wandered about in a state
of enslavement to the man
the like of which has never
been known.
—ALCIBIADES, QUOTED IN
PLATO, THE SYMPOSIUM
The Coquette • 77
maintaining aloofness, Coquettes start a competition to win their favor. If
the ability to use third parties to make targets jealous is a critical seductive
skill, Sigmund Freud was a grand Coquette.
All of the tactics of the Coquette have been adapted by political leaders
to make the public fall in love. While exciting the masses, these leaders re-
main inwardly detached, which keeps them in control. The political scientist
Roberto Michels has even referred to such politicians as Cold Coquettes.
Napoleon played the Coquette with the French: after the grand successes of
the Italian campaign had made him a beloved hero, he left France to con-
quer Egypt, knowing that in his absence the government would fall apart,
the people would hunger for his return, and their love would serve as the
base for an expansion of his power. After exciting the masses with a rousing
speech, Mao Zedong would disappear from sight for days on end, making
himself an object of cultish worship. And no one was more of a Coquette
than Yugoslav leader Josef Tito, who alternated between distance from and
emotional identification with his people. All of these political leaders were
confirmed narcissists. In times of trouble, when people feel insecure, the ef-
fect of such political coquetry is even more powerful. It is important to real-
ize that coquetry is extremely effective on a group, stimulating jealousy, love,
and intense devotion. If you play such a role with a group, remember to
keep an emotional and physical distance. This will allow you to cry and
laugh on command, project self-sufficiency, and with such detachment you
will be able play people's emotions like a piano.
Symbol: The
Shadow. It cannot be grasped. Chase
your shadow and it will flee; turn your back on
it and it will follow you. It is also a person's dark side,
the thing that makes them mysterious. After they have given
us pleasure, the shadow of their withdrawal makes us yearn
for their return, much as clouds make us yearn for the sun.
