Stir Up the Transgressive and Taboo • 353
confessing it. Indeed he delighted in their shocked responses, and his long
narrative poem, The Bride of Abydos, takes brother-sister incest as its theme.
Rumors began to spread of Byron's relations with Augusta, who was now
pregnant with his child. Polite society shunned him—but women were
more drawn to him than before, and his books were more popular than
ever.
Annabella Milbanke, Lady Caroline Lamb's cousin, had met Byron in
those first months of 1812 when he was the toast of London. Annabella
was sober and down to earth, and her interests were science and religion.
But there was something about Byron that attracted her. And the feeling
seemed to be returned: not only did the two become friends, to her bewil-
derment he showed another kind of interest in her, even at one point
proposing marriage. This was in the midst of the scandal over Byron and
Caroline Lamb, and Annabella did not take the proposal seriously. Over the
next few months she followed his career from a distance, and heard the
troubling rumors of incest. Yet in 1813, she wrote her aunt, "I consider his
acquaintance as so desirable that I would incur the risk of being called a
Flirt for the sake of enjoying it." Reading his new poems, she wrote that his
"description of Love almost makes me in love." She was developing an ob-
session with Byron, of which word soon reached him. They renewed their
friendship, and in 1814 he proposed again; this time she accepted. Byron
was a fallen angel and she would be the one to reform him.
It did not turn out that way. Byron had hoped that married life would
calm him down, but after the ceremony he realized it was a mistake. He
told Annabella, "Now you will find that you have married a devil." Within
a few years the marriage fell apart.
In 1816, Byron left England, never to return. He traveled through Italy
for a while; everyone knew his story—the affairs, the incest, the cruelty to
his lovers. But wherever he went, Italian women, particularly married no-
blewomen, pursued him, making it clear in their own way how prepared
they were to be the next Byronic victim. In truth, the women had become
the aggressors. As Byron told the poet Shelley, "No one has been more car-
ried off than poor dear me—I've been ravished more often than anyone
since the Trojan war."
Interpretation. Women of Byron's time were longing to play a different
role than society allowed them. They were supposed to be the decent,
moralizing force in culture; only men had outlets for their darker impulses.
Underlying the social restrictions on women, perhaps, was a fear of the
more amoral and unbridled part of the female psyche.
Feeling repressed and restless, women of the time devoured gothic nov-
els and romances, stories in which women were adventurous, and had the
same capacity for good and evil as men. Books like these helped to trigger a
revolt, with women like Lady Caroline playing out a little of the fantasy life
they had had in their girlhood, where it had to some extent been permit-need to lower his sexual
object. . . . Women
belonging to the higher
levels of civilization do not
usually transgress the
prohibition against sexual
activities during the period
of waiting, and thus they
acquire this close association
between the forbidden and
the sexual. . . . • The
injurious results of the
deprivation of sexual
enjoyment at the beginning
manifest themselves in lack
of full satisfaction when
sexual desire is later given
free rein in marriage. But,
on the other hand,
unrestrained sexual liberty
from the beginning leads to
no better result. It is easy
to show that the value the
mind sets on erotic needs
instantly sinks as soon as
satisfaction becomes readily
obtainable. Some obstacle
is necessary to swell the
tide of the libido to its
height; and at all periods of
history, wherever natural
barriers in the way of
satisfaction have not
sufficed, mankind has
erected conventional ones in
order to be able to enjoy
love. This is true both of
individuals and of nations.
In times during which no
obstacles to sexual
satisfaction existed, such
as, maybe, during the
decline of the civilizations
of antiquity, love became
worthless, life became
empty, and strong reaction-
formations were necessary
before the indispensable
emotional value of love
could be recovered.
—SIGMUND FREUD,
"CONTRIBUTIONS TO THE
PSYCHOLOGY OF LOVE,"
SEXUALITY AND THE
PSYCHOLOGY OF LOVE,
TRANSLATED BY JOAN RIVIÈRE
354 • The Art of Seduction
ted. Byron arrived on the scene at the right time. He became the lightning
rod for women's unexpressed desires; with him they could go beyond the
limits society had imposed. For some the lure was adultery, for others it was
romantic rebellion, or a chance to become irrational and uncivilized. (The
desire to reform him merely covered up the truth—the desire to be over-
whelmed by him.) In all cases it was the lure of the forbidden, which in this
case was more than merely a superficial temptation: once you became in-
volved with Lord Byron, he took you further than you had imagined or
wanted, since he recognized no limits. Women did not just fall in love with
him, they let him turn their lives upside down, even ruin them. They pre-
ferred that fate to the safe confines of marriage.
In some ways, the situation of women in the early nineteenth century
has become generalized in the early twenty-first. The outlets for male bad
behavior—war, dirty politics, the institution of mistresses and courtesans—
have faded away; today, not just women but men are supposed to be emi-
nently civilized and reasonable. And many have a hard time living up to
this. As children we are able to vent the darker side of our characters, a side
that all of us have. But under pressure from society (at first in the form
of our parents), we slowly repress the naughty, rebellious, perverse streaks
in our characters. To get along, we learn to repress our dark sides, which
become a kind of lost self, a part of our psyche buried beneath our polite
appearance.
As adults, we secretly want to recapture that lost self—the more adven-
turous, less respectful, childhood part of us. We are drawn to those who
live out their lost selves as adults, even if it involves some evil or destruc-
tion. Like Byron, you can become the lightning rod for such desires. You
must learn, however, to keep this potential under control, and to use it
strategically. As the aura of the forbidden around you is drawing targets into
your web, do not overplay your dangerousness, or they will be frightened
away. Once you feel them falling under your spell, you have freer rein. If
they begin to imitate you, as Lady Caroline imitated Byron, then take it
further—mix in some cruelty, involve them in sin, crime, taboo activity,
whatever it takes. Unleash the lost self within them; the more they act it
out, the deeper your hold over them. Going halfway will break the spell
and create self-consciousness. Take it as far as you can.
Baseness attracts everybody.
—JOHANN WOLFGANG GOETHE
Keys to Seduction
Society and culture are based on limits—this kind of behavior is accept-
able, that is not. The limits are fluid and change with time, but there are
always limits. The alternative is anarchy, the lawlessness of nature, which we
dread. But we are strange animals: the moment any kind of limit is im-This is how Monsieur
Maudair analyzed men's
attitude toward prostitutes:
"Neither the love of a
passionate but well-
brought-up mistress, nor
his marriage to a woman
whom he respects, can
replace the prostitute for the
human animal in those
perverse moments when he
covets the pleasure of
debasing himself without
affecting his social prestige.
Nothing can replace this
bizarre and powerful
pleasure of being able to
say everything, do
everything, profane and
parody without any fear of
retribution, remorse, or
responsibility. It is a
complete revolt against
organized society, his
organized, educated self
and especially his
religion." Monsieur
Mauclair hears the call of
the Devil in this dark
passion poetized by
Baudelaire. "The
prostitute represents the
unconscious which enables
us to put aside our
responsibilities."
—NINA EPTON,
LOVE AND THE FRENCH
Hearts and eye go traveling
along the paths that have
always brought them joy;
and if anyone attempts to
spoil their game, he only
makes them the more
passionate about it, God
knows. . . . so it was with
Tristan and Isolde. As
soon as they were forbidden
their desires, and prevented
from enjoying one another
by spies and guards, they
began to suffer intensely.
Desire now seriously
tormented them by its
magic, many times worse
than before; their need for
one another was more
