Use the Demonic Power of Words to Sow Confusion • 257
suitors have failed: they have begun by imposing themselves, a common
mistake. We think that by being persistent, by overwhelming our targets
with romantic attention, we are convincing them of our affection. Instead
we are convincing them of our impatience and insecurity. Aggressive atten-
tion is not flattering because it is not personalized. It is unbridled libido at
work; the target sees through it. Johannes is too clever to begin so obvi-
ously. Instead, he takes a step back, intriguing Cordelia by acting a little
cold, and carefully creating the impression of a formal, somewhat secretive
man. Only then does he surprise her with his first letter. Obviously there is
more to him than she has thought, and once she has come to believe this,
her imagination runs rampant. Now he can intoxicate her with his letters,
creating a presence that haunts her like a ghost. His words, with their im-
ages and poetic references, are constantly in her mind. And this is the ulti-
mate seduction: to possess her mind before moving to conquer her body.
The story of Johannes shows what a weapon in a seducer's armory a
letter can be. But it is important to learn how to incorporate letters in se-
duction. It is best not to begin your correspondence until at least several
weeks after your initial contact. Let your victims get an impression of you:
you seem intriguing, yet you show no particular interest in them. When
you sense that they are thinking about you, that is the time to hit them
with your first letter. Any desire you express for them will come as a sur-
prise; their vanity will be tickled and they will want more. Now make your
letters frequent, in fact more frequent than your personal appearances. This
will give them the time and space to idealize you, which would be more
difficult if you were always in their face. After they have fallen under your
spell, you can always take a step back, making the letters fewer—let them
think you are losing interest and they will be hungry for more.
Design your letters as homages to your targets. Make everything you
write come back to them, as if they were all you could think about—a
delirious effect. If you tell an anecdote, make it somehow relate to them.
Your correspondence is a kind of mirror you are holding up to them—they
get to see themselves reflected through your desire. If for some reason they
do not like you, write to them as if they did. Remember: the tone of your
letters is what will get under their skin. If your language is elevated, poetic,
creative in its praise, it will infect them despite themselves. Never argue,
never defend yourself, never accuse them of being heartless. That would
ruin the spell.
A letter can suggest emotion by seeming disordered, rambling from one
subject to another. Clearly it is hard for you to think; your love has un-
hinged you. Disordered thoughts are exciting thoughts. Do not waste time
on real information; focus on feelings and sensations, using expressions that
are ripe with connotation. Plant ideas by dropping hints, writing sugges-
tively without explaining yourself. Never lecture, never seem intellectual or
superior—you will only make yourself pompous, which is deadly. Far bet-
ter to speak colloquially, though with a poetic edge to lift the language
above the commonplace. Do not become sentimental—it is tiring, and tooalmighty Zeus?" \ And
with that she unbound
from her breast \ An ornate
sash inlaid with magical
charms. \ Sex is in it, and
Desire, and seductive \
Sweet Talk, that fools even
the wise. . . . \ Hera was
fast approaching Gargarus,
\ Ida's highest peak, when
Zeus saw her. \ And when
he saw her, lust enveloped
him, \ Just as it had the
first time they made love, \
Slipping off to bed behind
their parents' backs. \ He
stood close to her and said:
\ "Hera, why have you left
Olympus? \ And where are
your horses and chariot?" \
And Hera, with every
intention to deceive: \ "I'm
off to visit the ends of the
earth \ And Father Ocean
and Mother Tethys \ Who
nursed and doted on me in
their house. . . . " \ And
Zeus, clouds scudding
about him: \ "You can go
there later just as well. \
Let's get in bed now ami
make love. \ No goddess or
woman has ever \ Made
me feel so overwhelmed
with lust. . . . \ I've never
loved anyone as I love you
now, \ Never been in the
grip of desire so sweet. " \
And Hera, with every
intention to deceive: \
"What a thing to say, my
awesome lord. \ The
thought of us lying down
here on Ida \ Ami making
love outdoors in broad
daylight! \ What if one of
the Immortals saw us \
Asleep, and went to all the
other gods \Aud told
them? I could never get up
\ And go back home. It
would be shameful. \ But if
you really do want to do
this, \ There is the bedroom
your dear son Hephaestus \
Built for you, with good
solid doors. Let's go \
There and lie down, since
you're in the mood. " \
258 • The Art of Seduction
direct. Better to suggest the effect your target has on you than to gush
about how you feel. Stay vague and ambiguous, allowing the reader the
space to imagine and fantasize. The goal of your writing is not to ex-
press yourself but to create emotion in the reader, spreading confusion and
desire.
You will know that your letters are having the proper effect when your
targets come to mirror your thoughts, repeating words you wrote, whether
in their own letters or in person. This is the time to move to the more
physical and erotic. Use language that quivers with sexual connotation, or,
better still, suggest sexuality by making your letters shorter, more frequent,
and even more disordered than before. There is nothing more erotic than
the short abrupt note. Your thoughts are unfinished; they can only be com-
pleted by the other person.
Sganarelle to Don Juan: Well, what I have to say is . . . I
don't know what to say; for you turn things in such a
manner with your words, that it seems that you are right;
and yet, the truth of it is, you are not. I had the finest
thoughts in the world, and your words have totally scram-
bled them up.
—MOLIÈRE
Keys to Seduction
We rarely think before we talk. It is human nature to say the first thing
that comes into our head—and usually what comes first is some-
thing about ourselves. We primarily use words to express our own feelings,
ideas, and opinions. (Also to complain and to argue.) This is because we are
generally self-absorbed—the person who interests us most is our own self.
To a certain extent this is inevitable, and through much of our lives there is
nothing much wrong with it; we can function quite well this way. In se-
duction, however, it limits our potential.
You cannot seduce without an ability to get outside your own skin and
inside another person's, piercing their psychology. The key to seductive
language is not the words you utter, or your seductive tone of voice; it is a
radical shift in perspective and habit. You have to stop saying the first thing
that comes to your mind—you have to control the urge to prattle and vent
your opinions. The key is to see words as a tool not for communicating
true thoughts and feelings but for confusing, delighting, and intoxicating.
The difference between normal language and seductive language is like
the difference between noise and music. Noise is a constant in modern life,
something irritating we tune out if we can. Our normal language is like
noise—people may half-listen to us as we go on about ourselves, but just as
often their thoughts are a million miles away. Every now and then their ears
prick up when something we say touches on them, but this lasts only untilAnd Zeus, who masses the
clouds, replied: \ "Hera,
don't worry about any god
or man \ Seeing us. I'll
enfold you in a cloud so
dense \ And golden not
even Helios could spy on
us, \ And his light is the
sharpest vision there is."
—HOMER, THE ILIAD,
TRANSLATED BY STANLEY
LOMBARDO
ANTONY: Friends,
Romans, countrymen, lend
me your ears; \ I come to
bury Caesar, not to praise
him. \ The evil that men
do lives after them; \ The
good is oft interred with
their bones. \ So let it be
with Caesar. . . . \ I speak
not to disprove what
Brutus spoke, \ But here I
am to speak what I do
know. \ You all did love
him once, not without
cause. \ What cause
withholds you then to
mourn for him? \ O
judgment, thou art fled to
brutish beasts, \ And men
have lost their reason! Bear
with me. \ My heart is in
the coffin there with Caesar,
\And I must pause till it
come back to me. . . . \
PLEBEIAN: Poor soul! his
eyes are red as fire with
weeping. \ PLEBEIAN:
There's not a nobler man
in Rome than Antony. \
PLEBEIAN: Now mark
him. He begins again to
speak. \ ANTONY: But
yesterday the word of
Caesar might \ Have stood
against the world. Now
lies he there, \ And none so
poor to do him reverence. \
O masters! If I were
disposed to stir \ Your
hearts and minds to
mutiny and rage, \ I should
do Brutus wrong, and
Cassius wrong, \ Who,
you all know, are
