210 • The Art of Seduction
on a collective adventure, to go back to ideals we had given up. But before
anyone joined his crusade they had to be made aware of how much they
had lost, what was missing. A group, like an individual, can get mired in
routine, losing track of its original goals. Too much prosperity saps it of
strength. You can seduce an entire nation by aiming at its collective insecu-
rity, that latent sense that not everything is what it seems. Stirring dissatis-
faction with the present and reminding people about the glorious past can
unsettle their sense of identity. Then you can be the one to redefine it—a
grand seduction.
Symbol: Cupid's Arrow. What awakens desire in the seduced is
not a soft touch or a pleasant sensation; it is a wound. The ar-
row creates a pain, an ache, a need for relief Before desire
there must be pain. Aim the arrow at the victim's
weakest spot, creating a wound that you
can open and reopen.
Reversal
If you go too far in lowering the targets' self-esteem they may feel too in-
secure to enter into your seduction. Do not be heavy-handed; like
Lawrence, always follow up the wounding attack with a soothing gesture.
Otherwise you will simply alienate them.
Charm is often a subtler and more effective route to seduction. The
Victorian Prime Minister Benjamin Disraeli always made people feel better
about themselves. He deferred to them, made them the center of attention,
made them feel witty and vibrant. He was a boon to their vanity, and they
grew addicted to him. This is a kind of diffused seduction, lacking in ten-
sion and in the deep emotions that the sexual variety stirs; it bypasses peo-
ple's hunger, their need for some kind of fulfillment. But if you are subtle
and clever, it can be a way of lowering their defenses, creating an unthreat-
ening friendship. Once they are under your spell in this way, you can then
open the wound. Indeed, after Disraeli had charmed Queen Victoria and
established a friendship with her, he made her feel vaguely inadequate in
the establishment of an empire and the realization of her ideals. Everything
depends on the target. People who are riddled with insecurities may re-
quire the gentler variety. Once they feel comfortable with you, aim your
arrows.this spirit of discontent
renders a person especially
susceptible to "falling in
love." . . . In most cases
this attitude of disquiet is
unconscious, but in some it
reaches the threshold of
awareness in the form of a
slight uneasiness, or a
stagnant dissatisfaction, or
a realization of being upset
without knowing why.
—THEODOR REIK,
OF LOVE AND LUST
Master the Art of Insinuation
Making your targets feel dis-
satisfied and in need of your atten-
tion is essential, but if you are too obvious,
they will see through you and grow defensive.
There is no known defense, however,
against insinuation—the art of plant-
ing ideas in people's minds by
dropping elusive hints that
take root days later, even
appearing to them as
their own idea. Insinua-
tion is the supreme means
of influencing people. Cre-
ate a sublanguage—bold state-
ments followed by retraction and
apology, ambiguous comments, banal talk
combined with alluring glances—that enters
the target's unconscious to convey your real
meaning. Make everything suggestive.
