40 • The Art of Seduction
Dangers
The main dangers in the role of the Ideal Lover are the consequences
that arise if you let reality creep in. You are creating a fantasy that in-
volves an idealization of your own character. And this is a precarious task,
for you are human, and imperfect. If your faults are ugly enough, or intru-
sive enough, they will burst the bubble you have blown, and your target
will revile you. Whenever Tullia d'Aragona was caught acting like a com-
mon prostitute (when, for instance, she was caught having an affair just for
money), she would have to leave town and establish herself elsewhere. The
fantasy of her as a spiritual figure was broken. Casanova too faced this dan-
ger, but was usually able to surmount it by finding a clever way to break off
the relationship before the woman realized that he was not what she had
imagined: he would find some excuse to leave town, or, better still, he
would choose a victim who was herself leaving town soon, and whose
awareness that the affair would be short-lived would make her idealizing of
him all the more intense. Reality and long intimate exposure have a way of
dulling a person's perfection. The nineteenth-century poet Alfred de Mus-
set was seduced by the writer George Sand, whose larger-than-life charac-
ter appealed to his romantic nature. But when the couple visited Venice
together, and Sand came down with dysentery, she was suddenly no longer
an idealized figure but a woman with an unappealing physical problem. De
Musset himself showed a whiny, babyish side on this trip, and the lovers
separated. Once apart, however, they were able to idealize each other again,
and reunited a few months later. When reality intrudes, distance is often a
solution.
In politics the dangers are similar. Years after Kennedy's death, a string
of revelations (his incessant sexual affairs, his excessively dangerous
brinkmanship style of diplomacy, etc.) belied the myth he had created. His
image has survived this tarnishing; poll after poll shows that he is still
revered. Kennedy is a special case, perhaps, in that his assassination made
him a martyr, reinforcing the process of idealization that he had already set
in motion. But he is not the only example of an Ideal Lover whose attrac-
tion survives unpleasant revelations; these figures unleash such powerful
fantasies, and there is such a hunger for the myths and ideals they have to
sell, that they are often quickly forgiven. Still, it is always wise to be pru-
dent, and to keep people from glimpsing the less-than-ideal side of your
character.
Most
of us feel trapped within the
limited roles that the world expects us to
play. We are instantly attracted to those who are
more fluid, more ambiguous, than we are—those who
create their own persona. Dandies excite us because they can-
not be categorized, and hint at a freedom we want for ourselves.
They play with masculinity and femininity; they fashion their
own physical image, which is always startling; they are mysteri-
ous and elusive. They also appeal to the narcissism of each
sex: to a woman they are psychologically female, to a man
they are male. Dandies fascinate and seduce in large
numbers. Use the power of the Dandy to create
an ambiguous, alluring presence that
stirs repressed desires.
