
The Indulgent Strategy
In October of 1961, the American journalist Cindy Adams was granted
an exclusive interview with President Sukarno of Indonesia. It was a re-
markable coup, for Adams was a little-known journalist at the time, while
Sukarno was a world figure in the midst of a crisis. A leader of the fight for
Indonesia's independence, he had been the country's president since 1949,
when the Dutch finally gave up the colony. By the early 1960s, his daring
foreign policy had made him hated in the United States, some calling him
the Hitler of Asia.
Adams decided that in the interests of a lively interview, she would not
be cowed or overawed by Sukarno, and she began the conversation by jok-
ing with him. To her pleasant surprise, her ice-breaking tactic seemed to
work: Sukarno warmed up to her. He let the interview run well over an
hour, and when it was over he loaded her with gifts. Her success was re-
markable enough, but even more so were the friendly letters she began
to receive from Sukarno after she and her husband had returned to New
York. A few years later, he proposed that she collaborate with him on his
autobiography.
Adams, who was used to doing puff pieces on third-rate celebrities, was
confused. She knew Sukarno had a reputation as a devilish Don Juan—le
grand seducteur, the French called him. He had had four wives and hundreds
of conquests. He was handsome, and obviously he was attracted to her, but
why choose her for this prestigious task? Perhaps his libido was too power-
ful for him to care about such things. Nevertheless, it was an offer she could
not refuse.
In January of 1964, Adams returned to Indonesia. Her strategy, she had
decided, would stay the same: she would be the brassy, straight-talking lady
who had seemed to charm Sukarno three years earlier. During her first in-
terview with him for the book, she complained in rather strong terms
about the rooms she had been given as lodgings. As if he were her secre-
tary, she dictated a letter to him, which he was to sign, detailing the special
treatment she was to be given by one and all. To her amazement, he duti-
fully copied out the letter, and signed it.
Next on Adams's schedule was a tour of Indonesia to interview people
who had known Sukarno in his youth. So she complained to him about the
plane she had to fly on, which she said was unsafe. "I tell you what, honey,"
she told him, "I think you should give me my own plane." "Okay," he an-You're anxious to keep
your mistress? \ Convince
her she's knocked you all of
a heap \ With her stunning
looks. If it's purple she's
wearing, praise purple; \
When she's in a silk dress,
say silk \ Suits her best of
all. . . Admire \ Her
singing voice, her gestures
as she dances, \ Cry
"Encore!" when she stops.
You can even praise \ Her
performance in bed, her
talent for love-making— \
Spell out what turned you
on. \ Though she may
show fiercer in action than
any Medusa, \ Her lover
will always describe her as
kind \ And gentle. But
take care not to give
yourself away while \
Making such tongue-in-
cheek compliments, don't
allow \ Your expression to
ruin the message. Art's
most effective \ When
concealed. Detection
discredits you for good.
—OVID, THE ART OF LOVE,
TRANSLATED BY PETER GREEN
The little boy (or girl) seeks
to fascinate his or her
parents. In Oriental
literature, imitation is
221
