348 • The Art of Seduction
you can lead them astray with the hope of fulfilling a strong yet repressed
fantasy: sleeping with the child figure. In your presence, too, they will be-
gin to regress as well, infected by your childish, playful spirit.
Most of this came naturally to Villiers, but you will probably have to
use some calculation. Fortunately, all of us have strong childish tendencies
within us that are easy to access and exaggerate. Make your gestures seem
spontaneous and unplanned. Any sexual element of your behavior should
seem innocent, unconscious. Like Villiers, don't push for favors. Parents
prefer to spoil children who don't ask for things but invite them in their
manner. Seeming nonjudgmental and uncritical of those around you will
make everything you do seem more natural and naive. Have a happy, cheer-
ful demeanor, but with a playful edge. Emphasize any weaknesses you
might have, things you cannot control. Remember: most of us remember
our early years fondly, but often, paradoxically, the people with the stron-
gest attachment to those times are the ones who had the most difficult
childhoods. Actually, circumstances kept them from getting to be children,
so they never really grew up, and they long for the paradise they never got
to experience. James I falls into this category. These types are ripe targets
for a reverse regression.
Symbol: The Bed. Lying alone in bed, the child
feels unprotected, afraid, and needy. In a nearby room, there is the parent's bed. It is large and
forbidding, site of things you are not supposed to know about. Give the seduced both feel-
ings—helplessness and transgression—as you lay them into bed and put them to sleep.
Reversal
To reverse the strategies of regression, the parties to a seduction would
have to remain adults during the process. This is not only rare, it is not
very pleasurable. Seduction means realizing certain fantasies. Being a ma-
ture and responsible adult is not a fantasy, it is a duty. Furthermore, a person
who remains an adult in relation to you is harder to seduce. In all kinds of
seduction—political, media, personal—the target must regress. The only
danger is that the child, wearying of dependence, turns against the parent
and rebels. You must be prepared for this, and unlike a parent, never take it
personally.
Stir Up the Transgressive and Taboo
There are always social limits on what one can do.
Some of these, the most elemental taboos, go back centuries;
others are more superficial, simply defining polite and accept-
able behavior. Making your targets feel that you are leading them
past either kind of limit is immensely seductive. People yearn to ex-
plore their dark side. Not everything in romantic love is supposed to
be tender and soft; hint that you have a cruel, even sadistic streak.
You do not respect age differences, marriage vows, family ties. Once
the desire to transgress draws your targets to you, it will be hard for
them to stop. Take them further than they imagined—the shared
feeling of guilt and complicity will create a powerful bond.
