Effect a Regression • 347
fencing, tennis, dancing, his skills with birds and dogs. He was instructed in
the art of conversation—how to flatter, tell a joke, sigh at the right mo-
ment. Fortunately Villiers was easy to work with; he had a naturally buoy-
ant manner and nothing seemed to bother him. That same year the
conspirators managed to get him appointed the royal cup-bearer: every
night he poured out the king's wine, so that the king could see him up
close. After a few weeks, the king was in love. The boy seemed to crave at-
tention and tenderness, exactly what he yearned to offer. How wonderful it
would be to mold and educate him. And what a perfect figure he had!
The conspirators convinced Villiers to break off his engagement to a
young lady; the king was single-minded in his affections, and could not
stand competition. Soon James wanted to be around Villiers all the time,
for he had the qualities the king admired: innocence and a lighthearted
spirit. The king appointed Villiers gentleman of the bedchamber, making it
possible for them to be alone together. What particularly charmed James
was that Villiers never asked for anything, which made it all the more de-
lightful to spoil him.
By 1616, Villiers had completely supplanted the former favorite. He
was now the Earl of Buckingham, and a member of the king's privy coun-
cil. To the conspirators' dismay, however, he quickly accumulated even
more privileges than the Earl of Somerset had done. The king would call
him sweetheart in public, fix his doublets, comb his hair. James zealously
protected his favorite, anxious to preserve the young man's innocence. He
tended to the youth's every whim, in effect became his slave. In fact the
king seemed to regress; whenever Steenie, his nickname for Villiers, en-
tered the room, he started to act like a child. The two were inseparable un-
til the king's death, in 1625.
Interpretation. We are most definitely stamped forever by our parents, in
ways we can never fully understand. But the parents are equally influenced
and seduced by the child. They may play the role of the protector, but in
the process they absorb the child's spirit and energy, relive a part of their
own childhood. And just as the child struggles against sexual feelings
toward the parent, the parent must repress comparable erotic feelings that
lie just beneath the tenderness they feel. The best and most insidious way to
seduce people is often to position yourself as the child. Imagining them-
selves stronger, more in control, they will be lured into your web. They will
feel they have nothing to fear. Emphasize your immaturity, your weakness,
and you let them indulge in fantasies of protecting and parenting you—a
strong desire as people get older. What they do not realize is that you are
getting under their skin, insinuating yourself—it is the child who is con-
trolling the adult. Your innocence makes them want to protect you, but it is
also sexually charged. Innocence is highly seductive; some people even long
to play the corrupter of innocence. Stir up their latent sexual feelings and
348 • The Art of Seduction
you can lead them astray with the hope of fulfilling a strong yet repressed
fantasy: sleeping with the child figure. In your presence, too, they will be-
gin to regress as well, infected by your childish, playful spirit.
Most of this came naturally to Villiers, but you will probably have to
use some calculation. Fortunately, all of us have strong childish tendencies
within us that are easy to access and exaggerate. Make your gestures seem
spontaneous and unplanned. Any sexual element of your behavior should
seem innocent, unconscious. Like Villiers, don't push for favors. Parents
prefer to spoil children who don't ask for things but invite them in their
manner. Seeming nonjudgmental and uncritical of those around you will
make everything you do seem more natural and naive. Have a happy, cheer-
ful demeanor, but with a playful edge. Emphasize any weaknesses you
might have, things you cannot control. Remember: most of us remember
our early years fondly, but often, paradoxically, the people with the stron-
gest attachment to those times are the ones who had the most difficult
childhoods. Actually, circumstances kept them from getting to be children,
so they never really grew up, and they long for the paradise they never got
to experience. James I falls into this category. These types are ripe targets
for a reverse regression.
Symbol: The Bed. Lying alone in bed, the child
feels unprotected, afraid, and needy. In a nearby room, there is the parent's bed. It is large and
forbidding, site of things you are not supposed to know about. Give the seduced both feel-
ings—helplessness and transgression—as you lay them into bed and put them to sleep.
Reversal
To reverse the strategies of regression, the parties to a seduction would
have to remain adults during the process. This is not only rare, it is not
very pleasurable. Seduction means realizing certain fantasies. Being a ma-
ture and responsible adult is not a fantasy, it is a duty. Furthermore, a person
who remains an adult in relation to you is harder to seduce. In all kinds of
seduction—political, media, personal—the target must regress. The only
danger is that the child, wearying of dependence, turns against the parent
and rebels. You must be prepared for this, and unlike a parent, never take it
personally.
