70 • The Art of Seduction
in her—she wrote infrequently, and her letters lacked passion; nor did she
join him in Italy. He had to finish his war fast, so that he could return to
her side. Engaging the enemy with unusual zeal, he began to make mis-
takes. "To live for Josephine!" he wrote to her. "I work to get near you; I
kill myself to reach you." His letters became more passionate and erotic; a
friend of Josephine's who saw them wrote, "The handwriting [was] almost
indecipherable, the spelling shaky, the style bizarre and confused .... What
a position for a woman to find herself in—being the motivating force be-
hind the triumphal march of an entire army."
Months went by in which Napoleon begged Josephine to come to Italy
and she made endless excuses. But finally she agreed to come, and left Paris
for Brescia, where he was headquartered. A near encounter with the enemy
along the way, however, forced her to detour to Milan. Napoleon was away
from Brescia, in battle; when he returned to find her still absent, he blamed
his foe General Würmser and swore revenge. For the next few months he
seemed to pursue two targets with equal energy: Wiirmser and Josephine.
His wife was never where she was supposed to be: "I reach Milan, rush to
your house, having thrown aside everything in order to clasp you in my
arms. You are not there!" Napoleon would turn angry and jealous, but
when he finally caught up with Josephine, the slightest of her favors melted
his heart. He took long rides with her in a darkened carriage, while his
generals fumed—meetings were missed, orders and strategies improvised.
"Never," he later wrote to her, "has a woman been in such complete mas-
tery of another's heart." And yet their time together was so short. During a
campaign that lasted almost a year, Napoleon spent a mere fifteen nights
with his new bride.
Napoleon later heard rumors that Josephine had taken a lover while he
was in Italy. His feelings toward her cooled, and he himself took an endless
series of mistresses. Yet Josephine was never really concerned about this
threat to her power over her husband; a few tears, some theatrics, a little
coldness on her part, and he remained her slave. In 1804, he had her
crowned empress, and had she born him a son, she would have remained
empress to the end. When Napoleon lay on his deathbed, the last word he
uttered was "Josephine."
During the French Revolution, Josephine had come within minutes of los-
ing her head on the guillotine. The experience left her without illusions,
and with two goals in mind: to live a life of pleasure, and to find the man
who could best supply it. She set her sights on Napoleon early on. He was
young, and had a brilliant future. Beneath his calm exterior, Josephine
sensed, he was highly emotional and aggressive, but this did not intimidate
her—it only revealed his insecurity and weakness. He would be easy to en-
slave. First, Josephine adapted to his moods, charmed him with her femi-
nine grace, warmed him with her looks and manner. He wanted to possess
her. And once she had aroused this desire, her power lay in postponing its
satisfaction, withdrawing from him, frustrating him. In fact the torture ofAn absence, the declining
of an invitation to dinner,
an unintentional,
unconscious harshness are
of more service than all
the cosmetics and fine
clothes in the world.
—MARCEL PROUST
There's also nightly, to the
unintiated, \ A peril—not
indeed like love or
marriage, \ But not the less
for this to he depreciated: \
It is—I meant and mean
not to disparage \ The
show of virtue even in the
vitiated— \ It adds an
outward grace unto their
carriage— \ But to
denounce the amphibious
sort of harlot, \ Couleur
de rose, who's neither
white nor scarlet. \ Such is
your cold coquette, who
can't say say "no," \And
won't say "yes," and keeps
you on- and off-ing \ On a
lee shore, till it begins to
blow— \ Then sees your
heart wreck'd with an
inward scoffing. \ This
works a world of
sentimental woe, \ And
sends new Werters yearly
to the coffin; \ But yet is
merely innocent flirtation, \
Not quite adultery, but
adulteration.
—LORD BYRON,
THE COLD COQUETTE
There is a way to represent
one's cause and in doing so
to treat the audience in
such a cool and
condescending manner that
they are bound to notice
one is not doing it to please
them. The principle should
always be not to make
concessions to those who
don't have anything to give
but who have everything to
gain from us. We can wait
The Coquette • 71
the chase gave Napoleon a masochistic pleasure. He yearned to subdue her
independent spirit, as if she were an enemy in battle.
People are inherently perverse. An easy conquest has a lower value than
a difficult one; we are only really excited by what is denied us, by what we
cannot possess in full. Your greatest power in seduction is your ability to
turn away, to make others come after you, delaying their satisfaction. Most
people miscalculate and surrender too soon, worried that the other person
will lose interest, or that giving the other what he or she wants will grant
the giver a kind of power. The truth is the opposite: once you satisfy some-
one, you no longer have the initiative, and you open yourself to the possi-
bility that he or she will lose interest at the slightest whim. Remember:
vanity is critical in love. Make your targets afraid that you may be with-
drawing, that you may not really be interested, and you arouse their innate
insecurity, their fear that as you have gotten to know them they have be-
come less exciting to you. These insecurities are devastating. Then, once
you have made them uncertain of you and of themselves, reignite their
hope, making them feel desired again. Hot and cold, hot and cold—such
coquetry is perversely pleasurable, heightening interest and keeping the ini-
tiative on your side. Never be put off by your target's anger; it is a sure sign
of enslavement.
She who would long retain her power must use her lover ill.
—OVID
The Cold Coquette
In 1952, the writer Truman Capote, a recent success in literary and social
circles, began to receive an almost daily barrage of fan mail from a young
man named Andy Warhol. An illustrator for shoe designers, fashion maga-
zines, and the like, Warhol made pretty, stylized drawings, some of which
he sent to Capote, hoping the author would include them in one of his
books. Capote did not respond. One day he came home to find Warhol
talking to his mother, with whom Capote lived. And Warhol began to tele-
phone almost daily. Finally Capote put an end to all this: "He seemed one
of those hopeless people that you just know nothing's ever going to happen
to. Just a hopeless, born loser," the writer later said.
Ten years later, Andy Warhol, aspiring artist, had his first one-man
show at the Stable Gallery in Manhattan. On the walls were a series of
silkscreened paintings based on the Campbell's soup can and the Coca-Cola
bottle. At the opening and at the party afterward, Warhol stood to the side,
staring blankly, talking little. What a contrast he was to the older generation
of artists, the abstract expressionists—mostly hard-drinking womanizers full
of bluster and aggression, big talkers who had dominated the art scene for
the previous fifteen years. And what a change from the Warhol who had
badgered Capote, and art dealers and patrons as well. The critics were bothuntil they are begging on
their knees even if it takes
a very long time.
—SIGMUND FREUD, IN A LETTER
TO A PUPIL, QUOTED IN PAUL
ROAZEN, FREUD AND HIS
FOLLOWERS
When her time was come,
that nymph most fair
brought forth a child with
whom one could have
fallen in love even in his
cradle, and she called him
Narcissus. . . . Cephisus's
child had reached his
sixteenth year, and could
be counted as at once boy
and man. Many lads and
many girls fell in love with
him, but his soft young
body housed a pride so
unyielding that none of
those boys or girls dared to
touch him. One day, as he
was driving timid deer into
his nets, he was seen by
that talkative nymph who
cannot stay silent when
another speaks, but yet has
not learned to speak first
herself. Her name is Echo,
and she always answers
back. . . . • So when she
saw Narcissus wandering
through the lonely
countryside, Echo fell in
love with him and followed
secretly in his steps. The
more closely she followed,
the nearer was the fire
which scorched her: just as
sulphur, smeared round the
tops of torches, is quickly
kindled when aflame is
brought near it. How often
she wished to make
flattering overtures to him,
to approach him with
tender pleas! • The boy, by
chance, had wandered
away from his faithful band
of comrades, and he called
out: "Is there anybody
here?" Echo answered:
"Here!" Narcissus stood
still in astonishment,
