The Star • 127
What you need to do is etherealize yourself. Your words and actions seem
to come from your unconscious—have a certain looseness to them. You
hold yourself back, occasionally revealing a trait that makes people wonder
whether they really know you.
The Star is a creation of modern cinema. That is no surprise: film re-
creates the dream world. We watch a movie in the dark, in a semisomno-
lent state. The images are real enough, and to varying degrees depict
realistic situations, but they are projections, flickering lights, images—we
know they are not real. It as if we were watching someone else's dream. It
was the cinema, not the theater, that created the Star.
On a theater stage, actors are far away, lost in the crowd, too real in
their bodily presence. What enabled film to manufacture the Star was the
close-up, which suddenly separates actors from their contexts, filling your
mind with their image. The close-up seems to reveal something not
so much about the character they are playing but about themselves. We
glimpse something of Greta Garbo herself when we look so closely into
her face. Never forget this while fashioning yourself as a Star. First, you
must have such a large presence that you can fill your target's mind the way
a close-up fills the screen. You must have a style or presence that makes you
stand out from everyone else. Be vague and dreamlike, yet not distant or
absent—you don't want people to be unable to focus on or remember you.
They have to be seeing you in their minds when you're not there.
Second, cultivate a blank, mysterious face, the center that radiates Star-
ness. This allows people to read into you whatever they want to, imagining
they can see your character, even your soul. Instead of signaling moods and
emotions, instead of emoting or overemoting, the Star draws in interpreta-
tions. That is the obsessive power in the face of Garbo or Dietrich, or even
of Kennedy, who molded his expressions on James Dean's.
A living thing is dynamic and changing while an object or image is pas-
sive, but in its passivity it stimulates our fantasies. A person can gain that
power by becoming a kind of object. The great eighteenth-century charla-
tan Count Saint-Germain was in many ways a precursor of the Star. He
would suddenly appear in town, no one knew from where; he spoke many
languages, but his accent belonged to no single country. Nor was it clear
how old he was—not young, clearly, but his face had a healthy glow. The
count only went out at night. He always wore black, and also spectacular
jewels. Arriving at the court of Louis XV, he was an instant sensation; he
reeked wealth, but no one knew its source. He made the king and Madame
de Pompadour believe he had fantastic powers, including even the ability to
turn base matter into gold (the gift of the Philosopher's Stone), but he
never made any great claims for himself; it was all insinuation. He never
said yes or no, only perhaps. He would sit down for dinner but was never
seen eating. He once gave Madame de Pompadour a gift of candies in a
box that changed color and aspect depending on how she held it; this
entrancing object, she said, reminded her of the count himself. Saint-
Germain painted the strangest paintings anyone had ever seen—the colorsabove all a woman) linked
to the ravishing but
specious power of the
cinematographic image
itself. ...• The star is by
no means an ideal or
sublime being: she is
artificial. . . . Her presence
serves to submerge all
sensibility and expression
beneath a ritual fascination
with the void, beneath
ecstasy of her gaze and the
nullity of her smile. This is
how she achieves mythical
status and becomes subject
to collective rites of
sacrificial adulation. • The
ascension of the cinema
idols, the masses'
divinities, was and remains
a central story of modern
times. . . . There is no
point in dismissing it as
merely the dreams of
mystified masses. It is a
seductive occurrence. . . . •
To be sure, seduction in the
age of the masses is no
longer like that of. . . Les
Liaisons Dangereuses or
The Seducer's Diary, nor
for that matter, like that
found in ancient
mythology, which
undoubtedly contains the
stories richest in seduction.
In these seduction is hot,
while that of our modern
idols is cold, being at the
intersection of two cold
mediums, that of the image
and that of the
masses. ...• The great
stars or seductresses never
dazzle because of their
talent or intelligence, but
because of their absence.
They are dazzling in their
nullity, and in their
coldness—the coldness of
makeup and ritual
hieraticism. . . . • These
great seductive effigies are
our masks, our Eastern
Island statues.
—JEAN BAUDRILLARD,
SEDUCTION, TRANSLATED BY
BRIAN SINGER
128 • The Art of Seduction
were so vibrant that when he painted jewels, people thought they were real.
Painters were desperate to know his secrets but he never revealed them. He
would leave town as he had entered, suddenly and quietly. His greatest ad-
mirer was Casanova, who met him and never forgot him. When he died,
no one believed it; years, decades, a century later, people were certain he
was hiding somewhere. A person with powers like his never dies.
The count had all the Star qualities. Everything about him was ambigu-
ous and open to interpretation. Colorful and vibrant, he stood out from the
crowd. People thought he was immortal, just as a star seems neither to age
nor to disappear. His words were like his presence—fascinating, diverse,
strange, their meaning unclear. Such is the power you can command by
transforming yourself into a glittering object.
Andy Warhol too obsessed everyone who knew him. He had a distinc-
tive style—those silver wigs—and his face was blank and mysterious. People
never knew what he was thinking; like his paintings, he was pure surface.
In the quality of their presence Warhol and Saint-Germain recall the great
trompe l'oeil paintings of the seventeenth century, or the prints of M. C.
Escher—fascinating mixtures of realism and impossibility, which make
people wonder if they are real or imaginary.
A Star must stand out, and this may involve a certain dramatic flair, of
the kind that Dietrich revealed in her appearances at parties. Sometimes,
though, a more haunting, dreamlike effect can be created by subtle touches:
the way you smoke a cigarette, a vocal inflection, a way of walking. It is
often the little things that get under people's skin, and make them imitate
you—the lock of hair over Veronica Lake's right eye, Cary Grant's voice,
Kennedy's ironic smile. Although these nuances may barely register to the
conscious mind, subliminally they can be as attractive as an object with a
striking shape or odd color. Unconsciously we are strangely drawn to
things that have no meaning beyond their fascinating appearance.
Stars make us want to know more about them. You must learn to stir
people's curiosity by letting them glimpse something in your private life,
something that seems to reveal an element of your personality. Let them
fantasize and imagine. A trait that often triggers this reaction is a hint of
spirituality, which can be devilishly seductive, like James Dean's interest in
Eastern philosophy and the occult. Hints of goodness and big-heartedness
can have a similar effect. Stars are like the gods on Mount Olympus, who
live for love and play. The things you love—people, hobbies, animals—
reveal the kind of moral beauty that people like to see in a Star. Exploit this
desire by showing people peeks of your private life, the causes you fight for,
the person you are in love with (for the moment).
Another way Stars seduce is by making us identify with them, giving us
a vicarious thrill. This was what Kennedy did in his press conference about
Truman: in positioning himself as a young man wronged by an older man,
evoking an archetypal generational conflict, he made young people identify
with him. (The popularity in Hollywood movies of the figure of the disaf-
fected, wronged adolescent helped him here.) The key is to represent aIf you want to know all
about Andy Warhol, just
look at the surface of my
paintings and films and
me, and there I am.
There's nothing behind it.
—ANDY WARHOL, QUOTED IN
STEPHEN KOCH, STARGAZER:
THE LIFE, WORLD & FILMS OF
ANDY WARHOL
