The Rake • 25
tached. For the time he crossed your path, you were all he thought about.
His desire for you was so powerful that he gave you no time to think or to
worry about the consequences. He would come in the night, give you an
unforgettable moment, and then vanish. He might have conquered a thou-
sand women before you, but that only made him more interesting; better to
be abandoned than undesired by such a man.
The great seducers do not offer the mild pleasures that society con-
dones. They touch a person's unconscious, those repressed desires that cry
out for liberation. Do not imagine that women are the tender creatures that
some people would like them to be. Like men, they are deeply attracted to
the forbidden, the dangerous, even the slightly evil. (Don Juan ends by go-
ing to hell, and the word "rake" comes from "rakehell," a man who rakes
the coals of hell; the devilish component, clearly, is an important part of
the fantasy.) Always remember: if you are to play the Rake, you must con-
vey a sense of risk and darkness, suggesting to your victim that she is partici-
pating in something rare and thrilling—a chance to play out her own rakish
desires.
To play the Rake, the most obvious requirement is the ability to let
yourself go, to draw a woman into the kind of purely sensual moment in
which past and future lose meaning. You must be able to abandon yourself
to the moment. (When the Rake Valmont—a character modeled after the
Duke de Richelieu—in Laclos' eighteenth-century novel Dangerous Liaisons
writes letters that are obviously calculated to have a certain effect on his
chosen victim, Madame de Tourvel, she sees right through them; but when
his letters really do burn with passion, she begins to relent.) An added
benefit of this quality is that it makes you seem unable to control yourself, a
display of weakness that a woman enjoys. By abandoning yourself to the
seduced, you make them feel that you exist for them alone—a feeling re-
flecting a truth, though a temporary one. Of the hundreds of women that
Pablo Picasso, consummate rake, seduced over the years, most of them had
the feeling that they were the only one he truly loved.
The Rake never worries about a woman's resistance to him, or for that
matter about any other obstacle in his path—a husband, a physical barrier.
Resistance is only the spur to his desire, enflaming him all the more. When
Picasso was seducing Françoise Gilot, in fact, he begged her to resist; he
needed resistance to add to the thrill. In any case, an obstacle in your way
gives you the opportunity to prove yourself, and the creativity you bring to
matters of love. In the eleventh-century Japanese novel The Tale of Genji, by
the court lady Murasaki Shikibu, the Rake Prince Niou is not disturbed by
the sudden disappearance of Ukifune, the woman he loves. She has fled be-
cause although she is interested in the prince, she is in love with another
man; but her absence allows the prince to go to extreme lengths to track
her down. His sudden appearance to whisk her away to a house deep in the
woods, and the gallantry he displays in doing so, overwhelm her. Remem-
ber: if no resistances or obstacles face you, you must create them. No se-
duction can proceed without them.
26 • The Art of Seduction
The Rake is an extreme personality. Impudent, sarcastic, and bitingly
witty, he cares nothing for what anyone thinks. Paradoxically, this only
makes him more seductive. In the courtlike atmosphere of studio-era Holly-
wood, when most of the actors behaved like dutiful sheep, the great Rake
Errol Flynn stood out in his insolence. He defied the studio chiefs, engaged
in the most extreme pranks, reveled in his reputation as Hollywood's
supreme seducer—all of which enhanced his popularity. The Rake needs a
backdrop of convention—a stultified court, a humdrum marriage, a con-
servative culture—to shine, to be appreciated for the breath of fresh air he
provides. Never worry about going too far: the Rake's essence is that he
goes further than anyone else.
When the Earl of Rochester, seventeenth-century England's most no-
torious Rake and poet, abducted Elizabeth Malet, one of the most sought-
after young ladies of the court, he was duly punished. But lo and behold, a
few years later young Elizabeth, though wooed by the most eligible bache-
lors in the country, chose Rochester to be her husband. In demonstrating
his audacious desire, he made himself stand out from the crowd.
Related to the Rake's extremism is the sense of danger, taboo, perhaps
even the hint of cruelty about him. This was the appeal of another poet
Rake, one of the greatest in history: Lord Byron. Byron disliked any kind
of convention, and happily played this up. When he had an affair with his
half sister, who bore a child by him, he made sure that all of England knew
about it. He could be uncommonly cruel, as he was to his wife. But all of
this only made him that much more desirable. Danger and taboo appeal to
a repressed side in women, who are supposed to represent a civilizing, mor-
alizing force in culture. Just as a man may fall victim to the Siren through
his desire to be free of his sense of masculine responsibility, a woman may
succumb to the Rake through her yearning to be free of the constraints of
virtue and decency. Indeed it is often the most virtuous woman who falls
most deeply in love with the Rake.
Among the Rake's most seductive qualities is his ability to make women
want to reform him. How many thought they would be the one to tame
Lord Byron; how many of Picasso's women thought they would finally be
the one with whom he would spend the rest of his life. You must exploit
this tendency to the fullest. When caught red-handed in rakishness, fall
back on your weakness—your desire to change, and your inability to do so.
With so many women at your feet, what can you do? You are the one who
is the victim. You need help. Women will jump at this opportunity; they
are uncommonly indulgent of the Rake, for he is such a pleasant, dashing
figure. The desire to reform him disguises the true nature of their desire,
the secret thrill they get from him. When President Bill Clinton was clearly
caught out as a Rake, it was women who rushed to his defense, finding
every possible excuse for him. The fact that the Rake is so devoted to
women, in his own strange way, makes him lovable and seductive to them.
Finally, a Rake's greatest asset is his reputation. Never downplay your
bad name, or seem to apologize for it. Instead, embrace it, enhance it. It is
