Isolate the Victim • 315
He was not in fact very handsome, and his wealth was more than offset by
his bad reputation. His success was strategic: he isolated his victims, work-
ing so slowly and subtly that they did not notice it. The intensity of his at-
tention made a woman feel that in his eyes, at that moment, she was the
only woman in the world. This isolation was experienced as pleasure; the
woman did not notice her growing dependence, how the way he filled up
her mind with his attention slowly isolated her from her friends and her
milieu. Her natural suspicions of the man were drowned out by his intoxi-
cating effect on her ego. Aly Khan almost always capped off his seductions
by taking the woman to some enchanted place on the globe—a place that
he knew well, but where the woman felt lost.
Do not give your targets the time or space to worry about, suspect, or
resist you. Flood them with the kind of attention that crowds out all other
thoughts, concerns, and problems. Remember—people secretly yearn to be
led astray by someone who knows where they are going. It can be a plea-
sure to let go, and even to feel isolated and weak, if the seduction is done
slowly and gracefully.
Put them in a spot where they have no place to go, and
they will die before fleeing.
—SUN-TZU
Keys to Seduction
The people around you may seem strong, and more or less in control of
their lives, but that is merely a facade. Underneath, people are more
brittle than they let on. What lets them seem strong is the series of nests
and safety nets they envelop themselves in—their friends, their families,
their daily routines, which give them a feeling of continuity, safety, and
control. Suddenly pull the rug out from under them, drop them alone into
some foreign place where the familiar signposts are gone or scrambled, and
you will see a very different person.
A target who is strong and settled is hard to seduce. But even the stron-
gest people can be made vulnerable if you can isolate them from their nests
and safety nets. Block out their friends and family with your constant pres-
ence, alienate them from the world they are used to, and take them to
places they do not know. Get them to spend time in your environment. De-
liberately disturb their habits, get them to do things they have never done.
They will grow emotional, making it easier to lead them astray. Disguise all
this in the form of a pleasurable experience, and your targets will wake up
one day distanced from everything that normally comforts them. Then
they will turn to you for help, like a child crying out for its mother when
the lights are turned out. In seduction, as in warfare, the isolated target is
weak and vulnerable.
In Samuel Richardson's Clarissa, written in 1748, the rake Lovelace issheltered from the swells \
There in the still canals \
Those drowsy ships that
dream of sailing forth; \ It
is to satisfy \ Your least
desire, they ply \ Hither
through all the waters of
the earth. \ The sun at
close of day \ Clothes the
fields of hay, \ Then the
canals, at last the town
entire \ In hyacinth and
gold: \ Slowly the land is
rolled \ Sleepward under a
sea of gentle fire. \ There,
there is nothing else but
grace and measure, \
Richness, quietness, and
pleasure.
—CHARLES BAUDELAIRE,
"INVITATION TO THE VOYAGE,"
THE FLOWERS OF EVIL,
TRANSLATED BY RICHARD
WILBUR
316 • The Art of Seduction
attempting to seduce the novel's beautiful heroine. Clarissa is young, virtu-
ous, and very much protected by her family. But Lovelace is a conniving se-
ducer. First he courts Clarissa's sister, Arabella. A match between them
seems likely. Then he suddenly switches attention to Clarissa, playing on
sibling rivalry to make Arabella furious. Their brother, James, is angered by
Lovelace's change in sentiments; he fights with Lovelace and is wounded.
The whole family is in an uproar, united against Lovelace, who, however,
manages to smuggle letters to Clarissa, and to visit her when she is at the
house of a friend. The family finds out, and accuses her of disloyalty.
Clarissa is innocent; she has not encouraged Lovelace's letters or visits. But
now her parents are determined to marry her off, to a rich older man.
Alone in the world, about to be married to a man she finds repulsive, she
turns to Lovelace as the only one who can save her from this mess. Eventu-
ally he rescues her by getting her to London, where she can escape this
dreaded marriage, but where she is also hopelessly isolated. In these cir-
cumstances her feelings toward him soften. All of this has been masterfully
orchestrated by Lovelace himself—the turmoil within the family, Clarissa's
eventual alienation from them, the whole scenario.
Your worst enemies in a seduction are often your targets' family and
friends. They are outside your circle and immune to your charms; they may
provide a voice of reason to the seduced. You must work silently and subtly
to alienate the target from them. Insinuate that they are jealous of your tar-
get's good fortune in finding you, or that they are parental figures who have
lost a taste for adventure. The latter argument is extremely effective with
young people, whose identities are in flux and who are more than ready to
rebel against any authority figure, particularly their parents. You represent
excitement and life; the friends and parents represent habit and boredom.
In Shakespeare's The Tragedy of King Richard III, Richard, when still the
Duke of Gloucester, has murdered King Henry VI and his son, Prince Ed-
ward. Shortly thereafter he accosts Lady Anne, Prince Edward's widow,
who knows what he has done to the two men closest to her, and who hates
him as much as a woman can hate. Yet Richard attempts to seduce her. His
method is simple: he tells her that what he did, he did because of his love
for her. He wanted there to be no one in her life but him. His feelings were
so strong he was driven to murder. Of course Lady Anne not only resists
this line of reasoning, she abhors him. But he persists. Anne is at a moment
of extreme vulnerability—alone in the world, with no one to support her,
at the height of grief. Incredibly, his words begin to have an effect.
Murder is not a seductive tactic, but the seducer does enact a kind of
killing—a psychological one. Our past attachments are a barrier to the pres-
ent. Even people we have left behind can continue to have a hold on us. As
a seducer you will be held up to the past, compared to previous suitors,
perhaps found inferior. Do not let it get to that point. Crowd out the past with
your attentions in the present. If necessary, find ways to disparage their pre-
vious lovers—subtly or not so subtly, depending on the situation. Even go
so far as to open old wounds, making them feel old pain and seeing by con-
