174 • The Art of Seduction
discontent to manipulate him. Inventing a story of the deceptions he had
had to go through, he slowly drew Bouriscout into an affair that would last
many years. (Bouriscout had had previous homosexual encounters, but con-
sidered himself heterosexual.) Eventually the diplomat was led into spying
for the Chinese. All the while, he believed Shi Pei Pu was a woman—his
yearning for adventure had made him that vulnerable. Repressed types are
perfect victims for a deep seduction.
People who repress the appetite for pleasure make ripe victims, particu-
larly later in their lives. The eighth-century Chinese Emperor Ming Huang
spent much of his reign trying to rid his court of its costly addiction to lux-
uries, and was himself a model of austerity and virtue. But the moment he
saw the concubine Yang Kuei-fei bathing in a palace lake, everything
changed. The most charming woman in the realm, she was the mistress of
his son. Exerting his power, the emperor won her away—only to become
her abject slave.
The choice of the right victim is equally important in politics. Mass se-
ducers such as Napoleon or John F. Kennedy offer their public just what it
lacks. When Napoleon came to power, the French people's sense of pride
was beaten down by the bloody aftermath of the French Revolution. He
offered them glory and conquest. Kennedy recognized that Americans
were bored with the stultifying comfort of the Eisenhower years; he gave
them adventure and risk. More important, he tailored his appeal to the
group most vulnerable to it: the younger generation. Successful politicians
know that not everyone will be susceptible to their charm, but if they can
find a group of believers with a need to be filled, they have supporters who
will stand by them no matter what.
Symbol:
Big Game. Lions are dangerous—to hunt
them is to know the thrill of risk. Leopards are clever
and swift, offering the excitement of a difficult chase. Never
rush into the hunt. Know your prey and choose it carefully. Do
not waste time with small game—the rabbits that back into snares,
the mink that walk into a scented trap. Challenge is pleasure.
Choose the Right Victim • 175
Reversal
There is no possible reversal. There is nothing to be gained from trying
to seduce the person who is closed to you, or who cannot provide the
pleasure and chase that you need.
