14 • The Art of Seduction
to calm or excite her child even before the child understood what she was
saying. The Siren must have an insinuating voice that hints at the erotic,
more often subliminally than overtly. Almost everyone who met Cleopatra
commented on her delightful, sweet-sounding voice, which had a mesmer-
izing quality. The Empress Josephine, one of the great seductresses of the
late eighteenth century, had a languorous voice that men found exotic, and
suggestive of her Creole origins. Marilyn Monroe was born with her
breathy, childlike voice, but she learned to lower to make it truly seductive.
Lauren Bacall's voice is naturally low; its seductive power comes from its
slow, suggestive delivery. The Siren never speaks quickly, aggressively, or at
a high pitch. Her voice is calm and unhurried, as if she had never quite
woken up—or left her bed.
Body and adornment. If the voice must lull, the body and its adornment
must dazzle. It is with her clothes that the Siren aims to create the god-
dess effect that Baudelaire described in his essay "In Praise of Makeup":
"Woman is well within her rights, and indeed she is accomplishing a kind
of duty in striving to appear magical and supernatural. She must astonish
and bewitch; an idol, she must adorn herself with gold in order to be
adored. She must borrow from all of the arts in order to raise herself above
nature, the better to subjugate hearts and stir souls."
A Siren who was a genius of clothes and adornment was Pauline Bona-
parte, sister of Napoleon. Pauline consciously strove for a goddess effect,
fashioning hair, makeup, and clothes to evoke the look and air of Venus,
the goddess of love. No one in history could boast a more extensive and
elaborate wardrobe. Pauline's entrance at a ball in 1798 created an astound-
ing effect. She asked the hostess, Madame Permon, if she could dress at her
house, so no one would see her clothes as she came in. When she came
down the stairs, everyone stopped dead in stunned silence. She wore the
headdress of a bacchante—clusters of gold grapes interlaced in her hair,
which was done up in the Greek style. Her Greek tunic, with its gold-
embroidered hem, showed off her goddesslike figure. Below her breasts was
a girdle of burnished gold, held by a magnificent jewel. "No words can
convey the loveliness of her appearance," wrote the Duchess d'Abrantes.
"The very room grew brighter as she entered. The whole ensemble was so
harmonious that her appearance was greeted with a buzz of admiration
which continued with utter disregard of all the other women."
The key: everything must dazzle, but must also be harmonious, so that
no single ornament draws attention. Your presence must be charged, larger
than life, a fantasy come true. Ornament is used to cast a spell and distract.
The Siren can also use clothing to hint at the sexual, at times overtly but
more often by suggesting it rather than screaming it—that would make you
seem manipulative. Related to this is the notion of selective disclosure, the
revealing of only a part of the body—but a part that will excite and stir the
imagination. In the late sixteenth century, Marguerite de Valois, the infa-
The Siren • 15
mous daughter of Queen Catherine de Médicis of France, was one of the
first women ever to incorporate decolletage in her wardrobe, simply be-
cause she had the most beautiful breasts in the realm. For Josephine Bona-
parte it was her arms, which she carefully always left bare.
Movement and demeanor. In the fifth century B.C., King Kou Chien
chose the Chinese Siren Hsi Shih from among all the women of his realm
to seduce and destroy his rival Fu Chai, King of Wu; for this purpose, he
had the young woman instructed in the arts of seduction. Most important
of these was movement—how to move gracefully and suggestively. Hsi
Shih learned to give the impression of floating across the floor in her court
robes. When she was finally unleashed on Fu Chai, he quickly fell under
her spell. She walked and moved like no one he had ever seen. He became
obsessed with her tremulous presence, her manner and nonchalant air. Fu
Chai fell so deeply in love that he let his kingdom fall to pieces, allowing
Kou Chien to march in and conquer it without a fight.
The Siren moves gracefully and unhurriedly. The proper gestures,
movement, and demeanor for a Siren are like the proper voice: they hint at
something exciting, stirring desire without being obvious. Your air must be
languorous, as if you had all the time in the world for love and pleasure.
Your gestures must have a certain ambiguity, suggesting something both
innocent and erotic. Anything that cannot immediately be understood is
supremely seductive, and all the more so if it permeates your manner.
Symbol: Water.
The song of the Siren is liquid and
enticing, and the Siren herself is fluid and un-
graspable. Like the sea, the Siren lures you with the
promise of infinite adventure and pleasure. Forgetting past
and future, men follow her far out to sea, where they drown.
