346 • The Art of Seduction
dency and immaturity but rather the adolescent spirit of a first love. There
is a touch of innocence to the relationship. So much of adult life involves
compromise, conniving, and a certain toughness. Create the ideal atmo-
sphere by keeping such things out, drawing the other person into a kind of
mutual weakness, conjuring a second virginity. There should be a dream-
like quality to the affair, as if the target were reliving that first love but
could not quite believe it. Let all of this unfold slowly, each encounter re-
vealing more ideal qualities. The sense of reliving a past pleasure is simply
impossible to resist.
4. Some time in the summer of 1614, several members of England's upper
nobility, including the Archbishop of Canterbury, met to decide what to
do about the Earl of Somerset, the favorite of King James I, who was
forty-eight at the time. After eight years as the favorite, the young earl had
accumulated such power and wealth, and so many titles, that nothing was
left for anyone else. But how to get rid of this powerful man? For the time
being the conspirators had no answer.
A few weeks later the king was inspecting the royal stables when he
caught sight of a young man who was new to the court: the twenty-two-
year-old George Villiers, a member of the lower nobility. The courtiers
who accompanied the king that day watched the king's eyes following Vil-
liers, and saw with what interest he asked about this young man. Indeed
everyone had to agree that he was a most handsome youth, with the face of
an angel and a charmingly childish manner. When news of the king's inter-
est in Villiers reached the conspirators, they instantly knew they had found
what they had been looking for: a young man who could seduce the king
and supplant the dreaded favorite. Left to nature, though, the seduction
would never happen. They had to help it along. So, without telling Villiers
of their plan, they befriended him.
King James was the son of Mary Queen of Scots. His childhood had
been a nightmare: his father, his mother's favorite, and his own regents had
all been murdered; his mother had first been exiled, later executed. When
James was young, to escape suspicion he played the part of a fool. He hated
the sight of a sword and could not stand the slightest sign of argument.
When his cousin Queen Elizabeth I died in 1603, leaving no heir, he be-
came king of England.
James surrounded himself with bright, happy young men, and seemed
to prefer the company of boys. In 1612, his son, Prince Henry, died. The
king was inconsolable. He needed distraction and good cheer, and his fa-
vorite, the Earl of Somerset, was no longer so young and attractive. The
timing for a seduction was perfect. And so the conspirators went to work
on Villiers, under the guise of trying to help him advance within the court.
They supplied him with a magnificent wardrobe, jewels, a glittering car-
riage, the kind of things the king noticed. They worked on his riding,
Effect a Regression • 347
fencing, tennis, dancing, his skills with birds and dogs. He was instructed in
the art of conversation—how to flatter, tell a joke, sigh at the right mo-
ment. Fortunately Villiers was easy to work with; he had a naturally buoy-
ant manner and nothing seemed to bother him. That same year the
conspirators managed to get him appointed the royal cup-bearer: every
night he poured out the king's wine, so that the king could see him up
close. After a few weeks, the king was in love. The boy seemed to crave at-
tention and tenderness, exactly what he yearned to offer. How wonderful it
would be to mold and educate him. And what a perfect figure he had!
The conspirators convinced Villiers to break off his engagement to a
young lady; the king was single-minded in his affections, and could not
stand competition. Soon James wanted to be around Villiers all the time,
for he had the qualities the king admired: innocence and a lighthearted
spirit. The king appointed Villiers gentleman of the bedchamber, making it
possible for them to be alone together. What particularly charmed James
was that Villiers never asked for anything, which made it all the more de-
lightful to spoil him.
By 1616, Villiers had completely supplanted the former favorite. He
was now the Earl of Buckingham, and a member of the king's privy coun-
cil. To the conspirators' dismay, however, he quickly accumulated even
more privileges than the Earl of Somerset had done. The king would call
him sweetheart in public, fix his doublets, comb his hair. James zealously
protected his favorite, anxious to preserve the young man's innocence. He
tended to the youth's every whim, in effect became his slave. In fact the
king seemed to regress; whenever Steenie, his nickname for Villiers, en-
tered the room, he started to act like a child. The two were inseparable un-
til the king's death, in 1625.
Interpretation. We are most definitely stamped forever by our parents, in
ways we can never fully understand. But the parents are equally influenced
and seduced by the child. They may play the role of the protector, but in
the process they absorb the child's spirit and energy, relive a part of their
own childhood. And just as the child struggles against sexual feelings
toward the parent, the parent must repress comparable erotic feelings that
lie just beneath the tenderness they feel. The best and most insidious way to
seduce people is often to position yourself as the child. Imagining them-
selves stronger, more in control, they will be lured into your web. They will
feel they have nothing to fear. Emphasize your immaturity, your weakness,
and you let them indulge in fantasies of protecting and parenting you—a
strong desire as people get older. What they do not realize is that you are
getting under their skin, insinuating yourself—it is the child who is con-
trolling the adult. Your innocence makes them want to protect you, but it is
also sexually charged. Innocence is highly seductive; some people even long
to play the corrupter of innocence. Stir up their latent sexual feelings and
