102 • The Art of Seduction
Algeria. They needed these problems to seem charismatic, and in fact some
have even accused them of stirring up situations (Kennedy through his
brinkmanship style of diplomacy, for instance) that played to their love of
adventure. Show heroism to give yourself a charisma that will last you a
lifetime. Conversely, the slightest sign of cowardice or timidity will ruin
whatever charisma you had.
Magnetism. If any physical attribute is crucial in seduction, it is the eyes.
They reveal excitement, tension, detachment, without a word being spo-
ken. Indirect communication is critical in seduction, and also in charisma.
The demeanor of Charismatics may be poised and calm, but their eyes are
magnetic; they have a piercing gaze that disturbs their targets' emotions,
exerting force without words or action. Fidel Castro's aggressive gaze can
reduce his opponents to silence. When Benito Mussolini was challenged,
he would roll his eyes, showing the whites in a way that frightened people.
President Kusnasosro Sukarno of Indonesia had a gaze that seemed as if it
could have read thoughts. Roosevelt could dilate his pupils at will, making
his stare both hypnotizing and intimidating. The eyes of the Charismatic
never show fear or nerves.
All of these skills are acquirable. Napoleon spent hours in front of a
mirror, modeling his gaze on that of the great contemporary actor Talma.
The key is self-control. The look does not necessarily have to be aggressive;
it can also show contentment. Remember: your eyes can emanate charisma,
but they can also give you away as a faker. Do not leave such an important
attribute to chance. Practice the effect you desire.
Genuine charisma thus means the ability to internally gen-
erate and externally express extreme excitement, an ability
which makes one the object of intense attention and unre-
flective imitation by others.
—LIAH GREENFIELD
Charismatic Types—Historical Examples
The miraculous prophet. In the year 1425, Joan of Arc, a peasant girl
from the French village of Domrémy, had her first vision: "I was in my
thirteenth year when God sent a voice to guide me." The voice was that of
Saint Michael and he came with a message from God: Joan had been cho-
sen to rid France of the English invaders who now ruled most of the
country, and of the resulting chaos and war. She was also to restore the
French crown to the prince—the Dauphin, later Charles VII—who was its
rightful heir. Saint Catherine and Saint Margaret also spoke to Joan. Her
visions were extraordinarily vivid: she saw Saint Michael, touched him,
smelled him.In such conditions, where
half the battle was hand-
to-hand, concentrated into
a small space, the spirit
and example of the leader
counted for much. When
we remember this, it
becomes easier to
understand the astonishing
effect of Joan's presence
upon the French troops.
Her position as a leader
was a unique one. She was
not a professional soldier;
she was not really a soldier
at all; she was not even a
man. She was ignorant of
war. She was a girl dressed
up. But she believed, and
had made others willing to
believe, that she was the
mouthpiece of God. • On
Friday, April 29th, 1429,
the news spread in Orléans
that a force, led by the
Pucelle of Domrémy, was
on its way to the relief of
the city, a piece of news
which, as the chronicler
remarks, comforted them
greatly.
—VITA SACKVILLE-WEST,
SAINT JOAN OF ARC
The Charismatic • 103
At first Joan told no one what she had seen; for all anyone knew, she
was a quiet farm girl. But the visions became even more intense, and so in
1429 she left Domrémy, determined to realize the mission for which God
had chosen her. Her goal was to meet Charles in the town of Chinon,
where he had established his court in exile. The obstacles were enor-
mous: Chinon was far, the journey was dangerous, and Charles, even if she
reached him, was a lazy and cowardly young man who was unlikely to cru-
sade against the English. Undaunted, she moved from village to village, ex-
plaining her mission to soldiers and asking them to escort her to Chinon.
Young girls with religious visions were a dime a dozen at the time, and
there was nothing in Joan's appearance to inspire confidence; one soldier,
however, Jean de Metz, was intrigued with her. What fascinated him was
the detail of her visions: she would liberate the besieged town of Orléans,
have the king crowned at the cathedral in Reims, lead the army to Paris;
she knew how she would be wounded, and where; the words she attributed
to Saint Michael were quite unlike the language of a farm girl; and she was
so calmly confident, she glowed with conviction. De Metz fell under her
spell. He swore allegiance and set out with her for Chinon. Soon others of-
fered assistance, too, and word reached Charles of the strange young girl on
her way to meet him.
On the 350-mile road to Chinon, accompanied only by a handful of
soldiers, through a land infested with warring bands, Joan showed neither
fear nor hesitation. The journey took several months. When she finally ar-
rived, the Dauphin decided to meet the girl who had promised to restore
him to his throne, despite the advice of his counselors; but he was bored,
and wanted amusement, and decided to play a trick on her. She was to
meet him in a hall packed with courtiers; to test her prophetic powers, he
disguised himself as one of these men, and dressed another man as the
prince. Yet when Joan arrived, to the amazement of the crowd, she walked
straight up to Charles and curtseyed: "The King of Heaven sends me to
you with the message that you shall be the lieutenant of the King of
Heaven, who is the king of France." In the talk that followed, Joan seemed
to echo Charles's most private thoughts, while once again recounting in
extraordinary detail the feats she would accomplish. Days later, this indeci-
sive, flighty man declared himself convinced and gave her his blessing to
lead a French army against the English.
Miracles and saintliness aside, Joan of Arc had certain basic qualities that
made her exceptional. Her visions were intense; she could describe them in
such detail that they had to be real. Details have that effect: they lend a
sense of reality to even the most preposterous statements. Furthermore, in a
time of great disorder, she was supremely focused, as if her strength came
from somewhere unworldly. She spoke with authority, and she predicted
things people wanted: the English would be defeated, prosperity would re-
turn. She also had a peasant's earthy common sense. She had surely heard
descriptions of Charles on the road to Chinon; once at court, she couldAmongst the surplus
population living on the
margin of society [in the
Middle Ages] there was
always a strong tendency to
take as leader a layman, or
maybe an apostate friar or
monk, who imposed
himself not simply as a
holy man but as a prophet
or even as a living god. On
the strength of inspirations
or revelations for which he
claimed divine origin this
leader would decree for his
followers a communal
mission of vast dimensions
and world-shaking
importance. The conviction
of having such a mission,
of being divinely appointed
to carry out a prodigious
task, provided the
disoriented and the
frustrated with new
bearings and new hope. It
gave them not simply a
place in the world but a
unique and resplendent
place. A fraternity of this
kind felt itself an elite, set
infinitely apart from and
above ordinary mortals,
sharing also in his
miraculous powers.
—NORMAN COHN,
THE PURSUIT OF THE
MILLENNIUM
